nature ecology & evolution
Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w

Applying evolutionary theory to understand
host–microbiome evolution
Received: 25 November 2024
Accepted: 5 August 2025
Published online: 8 September 2025
Check for updates

Bob Week 1,2,3, Shelbi L. Russell4,5, Hinrich Schulenburg
Brendan J. M. Bohannan 1 & Marjolein Bruijning 6

,

2,3

All plants and animals are host to a community of microorganisms,
their microbiotas, which have crucial influences on the life history and
performance of their hosts. Despite the importance of such host–microbiota
relationships, relatively little is known about the role microbiotas have in
mediating evolution of the host and entire host–microbe assemblages.
This knowledge gap is partly due to the lack of theoretical frameworks
that generate testable predictions on the evolutionary dynamics of host–
microbiota systems. In this Perspective, we argue that the foundation for
such frameworks exists in evolutionary theory. We highlight four examples
of theoretical models—niche construction, indirect genetic effects, maternal
effects and multilevel selection—that capture important aspects of host–
microbiome evolution. We outline how each of these frameworks can
provide key insights into the evolution of host–microbiota systems while also
suggesting expansions of current theory to incorporate processes unique to
host–microbe assemblages; for instance, focusing on nuances in microbiota
transmission and ecological microbial community dynamics. Expanding
evolutionary theory to accommodate host–microbiota associations is key
for a more integrative understanding of evolution, and the approach outlined
here can guide future empirical research on the function and evolution of
these ubiquitous interactions.

All multicellular organisms have long-standing, intimate relationships
with microorganisms. These host-associated microbial communities
(including bacteria, archaea, viruses, protists and fungi—together
termed the microbiota) are crucial for host performance, affecting
host traits related to metabolism1, pathogen resistance2, immune
development3, disease4 and behaviour5, among many others. Beyond
its fundamental interest, the potential applications of the microbiota
vary widely, ranging from human health6 to sustainable agriculture7,
conservation biology8 and adaptation to climate change9.
There is no doubt that host-associated microbiotas can influence host performance. There is also increasing evidence that the
association of host and microbiota can facilitate adaptation to new

environmental conditions, either through changes in the microbiota,
the host or both10–13. There is probably variation among host systems
in the exact processes mediating such host–microbiome evolution,
including host–microbe coevolutionary interactions, as proposed
by the hologenome theory of evolution14, or less strict coevolutionary interactions12,15–22. Fidelity of microbiota transmission (Box 1),
the multiple levels of selection and evolutionary interests possible
in host–microbe associations22 are all key determinants shaping the
evolutionary dynamics of the association.
An in-depth appreciation of the exact characteristics of host–
microbiota systems and their evolution greatly benefits from theoretical approaches23. Although previous theoretical work has established

Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Department of Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA. 2Zoological Institute, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany.
Max-Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany. 4Department of Biomolecular Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz,
CA, USA. 5Genomics Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA. 6Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
e-mail: m.bruijning@uva.nl
1

3

Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

1769

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w

BOX 1

Mechanisms of microbiome inheritance
The fidelity of the microbiota across host generations is the most
critical factor that determines whether microorganisms share the
same evolutionary interests as their hosts, thus generally favouring
beneficial interactions. Different mechanisms favour fidelity or
infidelity in microbiota transmission across host generations (see the
figure below and figure 2 in ref. 52).
One process that results in cross-generational host–microbiota
fidelity is the vertical transmission of microorganisms from parents
to offspring. Strict vertical transmission, akin to genetic inheritance,
occurs through intracellular infection of germ cells as observed,
for example, in aphid–Buchnera102 or carpenter ant–Blochmannia
interactions103 and in more complex associations between sponges
and part of their microbiota104. However, even in the absence of such
strict vertical transmission, ‘intimate neighbourhood transmission’105
may result in the transmission from parents to offspring; for
instance, through the covering of eggs with microorganisms106,
through mode of delivery in humans107, or through hosts shaping
microbial community composition of their environment as a form
of niche construction108. Further, vertical microbiota transmission
goes beyond direct transmission from parents to offspring: living
in proximity (for example, sharing the same household with
relatives) can produce a so-called social microbiota that ultimately
promotes microbiota fidelity54. However, vertical transmission can
be incomplete in complex associations, such as between sponges
and their microbiota104. Even in the absence of vertical transmission,
host genotypes might directly influence the types of microorganism
that can be taken up and establish in a particular host, shaping
microbiota composition and increasing cross-generational fidelity109.

Environmental transmission can also result in host–microbe fidelity
across generations, whenever hosts faithfully acquire the same
microorganisms from the environment every generation, as found in
the bobtail squid–Vibrio110 and stinkbug–Burkholderia associations111.
Whenever the environmental microbial pool responds to selection on
hosts, environmental acquisition alone can lead to cross-generational
microbiota fidelity, through ‘collective inheritance’26. A combination of
these different processes can shape microbiota fidelity in single host
systems, as shown in wood mice (vertical and social transmission)55
and sponges (direct and indirect vertical transmission)104.
Despite all these different biological processes that may bolster
microbiota fidelity, many host-associated microorganisms were
proposed to lack cross-generational fidelity22, and the exact degree
of microbiota fidelity is often unknown for most host species. In other
cases, certain interventions may compromise vertical microorganism
transmission. Examples include antibiotic therapy on newborns112,113
or Caesarean section (that is, delivery mode), which seems to
have a transient effect on microbiota composition in newborns
and is then further shaped by breastfeeding (or its absence) and
early life exposure to microorganisms114–116. To quantify the fidelity
of microbiota transmission, one can estimate the heritability of
microbiota composition, which is the proportion of microbiota
variance (for example, variance in relative abundance of a microbial
taxon across hosts in a population) attributable to host genotypic
variance. Microbiota heritability has been estimated for only a
limited number of plant and animal host species117, suggesting low
microbiota heritabilities in general, although some were on par with
heritabilities of important host traits.

Inheritance of microorganisms
Shedding

Direct
vertical
Social

Environmental

Three primary modes of microbial inheritance. The left mode indicates cross-generational transmission of microorganisms as a
consequence of social acquisition of microorganisms. The middle mode indicates cross-generational transmission of microorganisms due
to direct parent–offspring transmission. The right mode indicates microbial inheritance mediated by the environment, where host offspring
acquire environmental microorganisms that descend from microorganisms shed by hosts in a previous generation. Additional transmission
routes via the environment can also ensure fidelity, as previously described.

new frameworks to study host–microbe systems24–27, the full breadth
of well-established evolutionary theory has not been applied to understand the evolution of host–microbe associations.
We propose taking advantage of existing theory in evolutionary
biology to explore and dissect the evolution of host–microbiota systems. We highlight four existing frameworks that address key characteristics of host–microbiome evolutionary dynamics. We discuss how
Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

we may borrow useful elements from each of these frameworks, while
also highlighting fundamental differences between host–microbe
evolutionary dynamics and existing frameworks, pinpointing features
of host–microbiome evolution that require the development of new
theory. We point to important directions for future theoretical work,
while emphasizing the importance of integrating theory and empirical work.
1770

Perspective

Niche construction
The framework of niche construction is centred on the reciprocal
dynamics of populations and their environment. Niche construction
considers the indirect effects of organismal activity on their own or
descendants’ fitness through environmental modification, and it has
been considered an evolutionary process in its own right41. There are
two interpretations of niche construction, both applicable to host–
microbiota systems (Fig. 1): (1) environmental modification by organismal activity (which may or may not have evolutionary consequences
Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

1
2

4

3
Host modification of the environment
1 Host activity and traits shape
the host’s microbiota

2 Host activity and traits shape
environmental microbial
communities

Ecological inheritance
3 The microbiota changes
selection on host genetic variation
=
z

+
g

)
,W
v(z
co

z

=

4 Environmental microbial communities
shape selection on host traits

)
,W
v(g
co

g

=
m

+

)
,W
v(m
co

m

×

W

z

mE

Parental
generation

Offspring
generation

mE

m'E

W

We define host–microbiome evolution as changes in allele frequencies
in the host population and/or in associated microbial communities
(through shifts in allele frequencies within microbial lineages or in
the relative abundances of microbial taxa) occurring within or across
host generations. When host trait variation is explained by genetic
variation across either hosts or microbiotas, then host–microbiome
evolution can result in changes of host traits over time. A few important
processes contributing to host–microbiome evolution include microbial meta-community dynamics28, microbe–microbe coevolution and
host–microbe coevolution29, and host dispersal. In general, we lack an
understanding of the consequences of natural selection on host–microbiota systems and the inheritance of selected host trait variation that
is mediated by the inheritance of host-associated microbiotas. In the
next sections, we explore how four existing evolutionary frameworks
may enhance our understanding of host–microbiome evolution over
the timescale in which host microevolutionary dynamics occur (for
example, from a single to possibly thousands of host generations),
each addressing different aspects of the evolution of host–microbiota
systems, and where the choice of framework will depend on the study
question. These frameworks are as follows: (1) niche construction,
(2) indirect genetic effects (IGEs), (3) maternal effects (MEs), and (4)
multilevel selection (MLS).
Each framework considers how microbiotas interact with the
evolution of host traits, and treats host-associated microbiotas
essentially as a form of non-genetic inheritance (NGI). NGI involves
the transmission of factors other than the DNA (for example, epigenetic patterns, cytoplasmic transmission, nutrient provisioning
and cultural inheritance), from parents (or other conspecifics) to
offspring. Depending on how these non-genetic factors covary and
interact with genetic, environmental and/or stochastic factors, NGI
can manifest itself as, for instance, MEs30, ecological inheritance31,
IGEs32 or possibly some combination of these effects. There exists
a large body of literature on the implications of NGI for plant and
animal evolution33. The fourth framework, MLS describes how composites of individuals respond to selection that jointly acts on various
scales of biological organization, and also considers the evolution
of microbial traits.
To illustrate concepts, we consider host traits that are jointly mediated by host genomes and host-associated microbiotas. More precisely,
we build on previous quantitative genetic approaches by assuming
host traits can be additively decomposed into genetic and microbial
components34,35. Here, microbiotas are summarized by their additive
effect on a host trait, measured by a linear model that explains host trait
variation in terms of microbiota composition35–39. This is analogous to
classical quantitative genetic methods for summarizing genomes by
their additive genetic effects on traits40.
Our focal frameworks are not mutually exclusive. In addition,
we introduce the concepts with mathematical terms to organize the
main underlying principles, to enhance clarity of key relationships or
dependencies within the frameworks, and to stimulate further theoretical work. Our symbolic representation can and should be extended
to account for additional factors contributing to host–microbiome
evolution.

Niche construction

Fitness (W)

Adapting evolutionary frameworks for host–
microbiota systems

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w

z

z

Fig. 1 | Conceptual overview for applying niche construction to host–
microbiome evolution. Numbers (1) and (2) focus on niche construction simply
as environmental modification, and numbers (3) and (4) consider niche
construction as an evolutionary process with ecological inheritance. (1)
Interpretation of a host’s microbiota as a component of the host environment
modified by host activity (such as diet and immune response). (2) Interpretation
of the microbiota in the host’s immediate surroundings as the host environment
is modified by activity such as shedding and priming. (3) Selection on microbiotamediated host traits (quantified by the relationship between fitness W and
phenotype z, as illustrated at the bottom of number (3)) decomposes into
selection on genetic g and microbial m components. Even when selection
consistently favours certain values of the host trait z, the resulting selection on
host genetic variation depends critically on how microbiota variation is
structured. (4) Microbiotas of the host’s immediate environment can shape
selection on host traits (for example, by competing with soil pathogens or
altering nutrient availability). Here the slope of host fitness in relation to host
trait is determined by the environmental microbiota mE. In this example, host
offspring encounter an environment with a steeper m′E and consequently
experience stronger directional selection.

for either the host or associated microorganisms), and (2) an evolutionary process involving feedback between environmental change and
organismal evolution.

Niche construction as an environmental modification
Niche construction as environmental modification by organismal activity applies to host–microbiota systems in at least two ways. First, the
microbiota of a host (such as microbiotas associated with the host’s
skin or gut) can be considered a part of the host’s environment (Fig. 1,
number (1)). Host activity and host traits that result in microorganism acquisition (for example, through feeding, social behaviour or
morphology), and host immune responses that result in selection of
microorganisms, provide mechanisms of niche construction.
Second, the microbiota of a host’s immediate surroundings
(for example, microbial communities associated with different food
sources or with surfaces the host comes into contact with) can be
considered a part of the host’s environment (Fig. 1, number (2)). Niche
construction then occurs when host activity alters the environmental
microbiota composition; for instance, by shedding microorganisms
into the surroundings, by host-mediated structuring of the environment (for example, nest building)42 or the construction of other types
of built environment43, by nutrient provisioning (for example, ‘priming’
of soil microorganisms by plant roots)44 and by ‘farming’ activities
(for example, the cultivation of fungi by insects)45. Resulting altered
1771

Perspective
microbiota composition or microbial activity may consequently affect
host fitness, for example, by increasing nutrient availability or suppressing pathogens, as has been observed in soil surrounding plant
roots46,47. Furthermore, if host genotypes show differential fitness in
response to such environmental modifications, then niche construction can establish an evolutionary process, as discussed next.

Niche construction as an evolutionary process
The interpretation of niche construction as an evolutionary process
is more stringent as it requires the maintenance of natural selection
pressures across generations (Fig. 1, numbers (3) and (4)). This process,
called ecological inheritance, requires that the activity of a particular
organism modifies the environment, and that these environmental
modifications influence selection on this organism in subsequent
generations31,41. Host-associated microbiotas can establish modes of
ecological inheritance in at least two ways.
First, by contributing to host trait variation, microbiotas can facilitate the inheritance of natural selection pressures on host genetic variation associated with that trait (Fig. 1, number (3)). Consider a host trait z
that is additively determined by a genetic component g and a microbiota
component m, such that z = g + m. This model of host trait architecture
has previously been applied theoretically by ref. 34, and expanded on by
ref. 35. Writing W(z) for host fitness as a function of host trait, selection
on the host trait is defined as the covariance of fitness and phenotype:
Sz = cov(W, z). This covariance can be partitioned into selection on host
trait components g and m, given by Sg = cov(W, g) and Sm = cov(W, m), such
that Sz = Sg + Sm (Fig. 1; number (3)). This illustrates that selection at the
level of host trait results in indirect selection at the levels of host genotype
and host microbiota. Rearranging these components shows that selection on host genotype is mediated by selection on host microbiota (that
is, Sg = Sz − Sm). Hence, in this case, the inheritance of microbiota variation
across host generations establishes a mode of ecological inheritance.
Second, microbiotas can modify selection pressures on host variation by altering the host environment, such as resource availability and
habitat quality (Fig. 1, number (4)). These modified selection pressures
can have long-term evolutionary consequences on host traits, such as
immunological profiles, tissue structures and physiological processes
that influence specific microbial functions18. Summarizing the effect of
the environmental microbiota on host fitness as mE, we can include it as
a parameter of the fitness function: W(z ∣ mE). Then, the correlation of mE
between host generations maintained by host activity (such as shedding)
results in the maintenance of selection pressures on host trait variation,
and therefore establishes a second mode of ecological inheritance. We
note that the focal host trait does not need to be mediated by the host
microbiota. Empirically, mE can be measured as the effect of the microbiota in the host’s immediate environment on host fitness obtained from
a linear model that explains the variance of host fitness, both in terms of
host traits and in terms of the environmental microbiota composition.

IGEs
IGEs are the influence of an individual’s genotype on the phenotype
of another (typically conspecific) individual32. As IGEs contribute to
the expression and inheritance of phenotypic variation, they have
important evolutionary consequences. A major application of IGEs is
to understand the evolutionary consequences of social interactions
in social insects48–51.
Host-associated microbiotas establish IGEs between host individuals when three conditions are met: (1) host genes determine microbiota
composition, (2) microbiota composition is transmissible between
individuals, and (3) microbiotas mediate a host trait. When these conditions are met, microbiota transmission (which may occur during
social encounters52) forms the mechanism for the genes of one host
to influence the phenotype of another host (Fig. 2a).
To illustrate this, consider microbiota composition as a host trait
z1 that is mediated by host genotype g1, such that z1 = g1 + e1, where e1 is
Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w

an environmental effect. Now consider another host trait that is mediated by host genes and microbiota composition: z2 = g2 + e2 + z1. In this
scenario, z2 is a quantitative host character that is partially mediated by
its microbiota such that z1 and g2 are obtained as the additive microbiota
and genetic effects given by a linear model, with e2 taken as a standard
error term40. Furthermore, with measurements of z1 across hosts in
hand, g1 and e1 can then be obtained as the host additive genetic effect
and error term, respectively, for a lineal model of z1. This IGE model is
similar to the starting point taken by ref. 53 to derive their model for
interactions with non-reciprocal effects.
Assuming that each individual engages in a single interaction with
another randomly chosen individual, we denote by z′1 , g′1 , e′1 the microbiota trait and trait components for the non-focal interacting individual. Suppose that the social interaction results in an exchange of
microorganisms, so that their microbiota composition traits become
similar by 0 ≤ ψ ≤ 1. Writing z∗1 as the microbiota composition of the
focal individual after the interaction, we then have z∗1 = (1 − ψ)z1 + ψz′1.
Assuming z2 is expressed after microorganism exchange, we can write
z2 = g2 + e2 + (1 − ψ)z1 + ψz′1 . The coefficient ψ measures microbial
transmission via social contact, quantifying an indirect genetic effect
of the interacting partner’s additive genetic value g′1 on the expression
of the focal individual’s trait value z2.
The IGE framework has applications for understanding host–
microbiome evolution, particularly for systems where social transmission of microorganisms (either through direct contact or through
spatial proximity) between unrelated individuals has an important
role. For instance, because conspecific social interactions are known to
structure gut microbiotas in baboons54 and wood mice55, the IGE framework may provide important insights into the roles that host genetics
and microbiotas have in mediating host traits for these systems. As the
IGE framework considers interactions between arbitrary individuals
and only incorporates non-random interactions mediated by trait
covariances, and not necessarily relatedness32, it requires additional
assumptions to apply to systems with substantial parent–offspring
microorganism transmission. To model this complementary scenario
more directly, the related framework of MEs has greater utility.

MEs
An ME is the influence of a parental phenotype on an offspring phenotype, controlling for genetic variation, mediated by parent–offspring
interactions such as maternal care56. Host-associated microbiotas establish MEs between host parents and host offspring when a host trait is
mediated by its microbiota, and part of the host’s microbiota is inherited
from direct or indirect parent–offspring transmission (Box 1 and Fig. 2b).
For instance, the composition of mammalian milk is mediated by host
microbiotas and is transmitted directly from parent to offspring57.
Assume a host trait decomposes as z = g + m, where g is the additive
host genetic effect and m is the additive effect of host microbiota
composition. Just as with the niche construction framework, m can be
measured as the additive effect of microbiota composition on host
trait obtained from a linear model35,40. To account for microbiota transmission directly from parents to offspring, we model the offspring
microbiota m′ as depicted in Fig. 2b, where ι is the proportion of the
offspring microbiota inherited from its parent, and (1 − ι) is the proportion acquired from the environment and unrelated hosts, together
having the average composition ξ. δ is an ontogenetic differential of
the microbiota that is independent of m.
With this, we can model microbiota-mediated MEs for a wide range
of maternal care patterns (Box 1 for examples). The microbiota’s contribution to an ME is measured as the partial regression coefficient of
offspring trait on maternal trait, holding genetic variation constant30.
Then, writing the trait variance as var(z), and var(m) as the component
of var(z) explained by microbiota variation, the ME is then ω = ι (var(m)/
var(z)), which is the slope obtained from regressing the offspring trait
z′ on the parental trait z after controlling for genetic variation (Fig. 2b).
1772

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w

a IGEs

b MEs

Genotypes of one host affect another host through their microbiota

Microbiota establishes MEs

=

+
g1

z1

Microbiota
exchange

=
e1

= (1 − Ψ)

z'1

Parent microbiota

+
g'1

m

+
z1*

m'

+
g2

Offspring microbiota
m' = ιm + (1 – ι) ξ + δ

1–ι
ξ

=
z2

Development
δ

+ Ψ

z1*
Microbiota
affects host
trait

Inheritance

ι
e'1

+

=
z

e2

g

ω = ι (var(m)/var(z))

z'g

Genotype affects
microbiota
composition

m

zg

Fig. 2 | A model of microbiota-mediated IGEs and MEs. a, Microbiota
composition of a focal host and interacting partner (z1 and z′1, respectively) are
mediated by host genetic effects (g1, g′1) and environmental effects (e1, e′1).
Updated compositions after microorganisms are exchanged via social contact,
quantified by ψ, are denoted by z∗1 . Then a second trait z2, mediated by microbiota
composition z∗1 (in addition to genetic effect g2 and environmental effect e2), is
affected by the genetic factor g′1 in the interacting partner. b, At birth the host

offspring acquires a proportion ι of its microbiota from the parent, and the
remaining proportion 1 − ι from the environment (with composition ξ). The
offspring microbiota subsequently shifts by an amount δ throughout
development. Quantification of the microbiota-mediated MEs is illustrated in the
bottom section as the slope ω of the relationship between offspring trait value z′g
and parental trait value zg, where the subscript g indicates host genetic variation is
held constant.

This shows that host-associated microbiotas can be modelled as
maternal characters. The application is limited to microbiome inheritance resulting from strict parent–offspring transmission. Furthermore,
MEs on microbiota composition will probably depend on organism age
and diminish as offspring acquire microorganisms from their environment and unrelated conspecifics58 and as within-host microbiota
dynamics unfold25. By contrast, estimates of MEs on some microbially
mediated traits may actually become stronger with age as the early
microbiota has an important role in development59.

where hosts control the composition of functionally important internal
microbiotas. For instance, in mammals, intestinal microbiota composition is shaped by within-host selection pressures due to the host
immune system65 or the epithelial environment66. These within-host
filters generate microbiota variation among hosts, creating potential
for selection to operate at both within-host and among-host levels. In
Box 2, we illustrate a design for an experimental test of MLS1.

MLS
This last framework applies to host–microbiota systems in which either
microbiota-mediated host traits or microbial traits are heritable and
subject to natural selection. Heritable variation in the host and microbiota fidelity across generations are essential for the host–microbe
system to collectively respond to natural selection (Box 1). In other
words, Lewontin’s conditions60 must be met. Given these restrictive
conditions, most host–microbiota systems are not considered evolutionary individuals.
Host–microbiota systems show natural selection at the levels of
individuals, kin and as groups of unrelated organisms61, all explicitly
captured by MLS models. As these models do not make a priori assumptions about inheritance, they are useful for understanding when a given
inheritance mechanism establishes selection at higher levels of organization. MLS models have been categorized into two types: MLS1 explains
differences among groups in their respective rates of production of
contained individuals, while MLS2 explains differences among groups
in their respective rates of production of distinct new groups62,63.
By testing different MLS models, we can ascertain whether individual, kin, or group selection, or a combination, is the predominant
force in the evolution of emergent host–microbe phenotypes. For
instance, Hermsen64 recently introduced a framework for measuring
MLS1 and MLS2 to analyse simulated data. Next, we describe how this
general framework may be operationalized for the measurement of
MLS1 and MLS2 in the context of host–microbe systems.
So far, MLS in host–microbiota systems has not yet been empirically measured. However, MLS may be especially relevant in systems
Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

MLS2
Due to its relative simplicity, we begin with MLS2 (Fig. 3), which
focuses on the reproduction of groups. MLS2 occurs when host birth
and death rates depend on microbiota composition. Focusing on a
microbiota-mediated host trait z, the change in mean traits between
parental and offspring generations can be expressed using the Price
equation as
Δz ̄ = S + T,
′

(1)
′

where Δz ̄ = z ̄ − z ̄ is the difference between offspring mean trait z ̄
and parental mean trait z ̄ ; host-level selection is captured by
S = cov(W, z)/W , with W (W̄ ) host individual fitness (host mean fitness) and the covariance is taken across host parents. The term
T = WΔz/W is called transmission bias, and here accounts for trait
differences resulting from within-host microbiota dynamics and
differential colonization abilities of microorganisms. More precisely,
Δz is the average ontogenetic differential across offspring of a given
host parent so that WΔz is the average ontogenetic differential across
all offspring67. Following Hermsen’s64 interpretation, in the context
of host–microbiota systems, T captures within-host selection on
microbial variation. As one could measure microbiota-mediated
host traits and host fitness, at least in principle, this approach is
particularly amenable to empirical study. In particular, for cases in
which the mean trait differential Δz ̄ and host-level selection S are
directly measurable, the transmission bias term can be inferred as
T = Δz ̄ − S . This provides an explicit method to partition host trait
dynamics into components due to selection among hosts and selection within hosts.
1773

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w

BOX 2

Testing theory using the Daphnia host system
The water flea Daphnia (see the figure below), a freshwater
crustacean, is a model organism in many biological fields, such as
ecotoxicology118, epidemiology119 and eco-evolutionary dynamics120.
Increasingly, it is also used to study host–microbiota evolution121.
Several features make the Daphnia–microbiota system uniquely
suited to test theoretical predictions:
• Its gut microbiota is relatively simple, has distinct core members and
is clearly separated from the surrounding aquatic microbiota122.
• Microbiota composition is shaped by both environmental
conditions (for example, temperature123) and host genotype124.
• The microbiota influences host fitness125,126 and may mediate
plastic responses to the environment127.
• Many phenotypic traits—such as defence induction128—are well
characterized and may be partly microbiota mediated.

a

b

• Both horizontal and vertical microbiota transmission occur129,130.
• Experimental manipulations (for example, gnotobiotic rearing and
microbiota transplants) are feasible, and host genotypes can be
controlled via clonal lineages126,131.
These advantages enable rigorous tests of theoretical frameworks.
We next outline two illustrative experimental designs:
Testing niche construction
Daphnia–microbiota associations can be evolved in mesocosms
under three treatments (right-hand side of the figure below):
1. Environmental microbiota inheritance: hosts and their microbial
environment are maintained together, allowing microbial shaping
of the environment and ecological inheritance via environmental
modification.

Testing for microbiota-mediated niche construction

Testing for MLS on the microbiota
Ecological inheritance via
environmental microbiota
modification and vertical
transmission
Select hosts with high
reproductive output

Ecological inheritance via
vertical microbiota
transmission only

No ecological inheritance

Select hosts with low
reproductive output

Microbiota
transplantation

Common garden experiment to test for the effects of
host level selection on the presence of beneficial
host–microbe associations

Expose populations to stressor to test how niche construction
affects adaptive potential

Experimental approaches for testing MLS1 and evolutionary niche construction using the water flea Daphnia system. a, MLS1 can be
tested by maintaining two treatments: microorganisms from the hosts with highest fitness are isolated and transplanted into the subsequent
host generation (left) and microorganisms from hosts with the lowest fitness are isolated and transplanted into the subsequent host generation
(right). b, Evolutionary niche construction can be tested by maintaining three treatments: mesocosms are maintained including host-associated
and environmental microorganisms (left), host-associated microorganisms are included but environmental microorganisms are excluded
(middle), and both host-associated and environmental microorganisms are excluded (right). Subsequently, host populations are exposed to a
stressor to test whether ecological inheritance via environmental modification (left) or vertical transmission (middle) promote host adaptation
compared with the absence of ecological inheritance (right). Photograph credit: Héléne Vanvelk and Maxime Fajgenblat (KU Leuven).

Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

1774

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w

(continued from previous page)
2. Vertical microbiota transmission only: hosts are transferred to
fresh environments regularly, preserving vertical transmission but
preventing environmental shaping.
3. No ecological inheritance: both host-associated and environmental microorganisms are excluded at each transfer; microbiotas are
provided via inoculum from naive Daphnia.
Each treatment is subjected to an environmental stressor (for
example, toxins or elevated temperature) to:
• Evaluate whether niche construction promotes adaptation (via
host reproduction or population growth)
• Investigate ecological and molecular changes (for example,
microbiota dynamics, or host or metatranscriptomic responses)
A follow-up transplant experiment can assess whether evolved
hosts benefit specifically from shaped microbial environments.

MLS1
MLS1, in this context, takes a microorganism-centric approach and
occurs when microorganism strains or species show differential fitness64. It considers traits of different microorganism taxa (for example,
strains or species), which we write as αi for microorganism taxon i. These
traits may be any phenotype of the microorganism, such as growth
rates on different carbon sources or the additive effect on a host trait.
Selection at different levels is then quantified using covariances that
involve the microbial trait and a notion of microorganism fitness (wi for
microorganism i). Here we focus on two measures of microorganism
fitness: host colonization rates and within-host proliferation rates.
First, we can quantify microorganism colonization fitness for a
given host by comparing the relative abundances of microorganisms
in the immediate environment of the host (for example, the substrate
and other hosts) to the relative abundances of microorganisms inhabiting the host (Fig. 4; top). The relative abundance of microorganism i
in the host can be written as κ′i = wi κi , with κi being the relative abundance of microorganism i within the immediate environment of the
host. As κi and κ′i are, at least in principle, measurable, we can quantify
(κ)
microorganism colonization fitness as wi = κi /κ′i , where (κ) emphasizes that colonization is used as a fitness measure.
Second, we can quantify microorganism growth fitness within a
given host by comparing the relative abundances of microorganisms
at host adolescence to relative abundances at host maturity. We write
γi for the relative abundance of microorganism i in an adolescent host,
and γ′i for its relative abundance when that same host has matured
(Fig. 4; bottom). Growth fitness of microorganism i can be quantified
(γ)
as wi = γi /γ′i .
Regardless of the exact fitness measure, MLS1 suggests that selection on microorganism trait α (across the entire host–microbiota system) can be partitioned into two components: within- and among-host
selection. Within-host selection (Swithin) is found by first calculating the
covariance of fitness and phenotypes across microorganisms within
each host j separately (covj(w, α)), and then this covariance is averaged
across hosts so that
Swithin = cov(w, α).

(2)

Among-host selection (Samong) is found by first averaging fitness and
microorganism traits across microorganism taxa within each host
separately (which we write as w̄ and ᾱ , respectively, for a given host)
before computing their covariance across hosts such that
Samong = cov(w,̄ ̄
α).

(3)

This approach allows us to connect levels of selection occurring
simultaneously across distinct scales of biological organization.
Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

Testing MLS1
To test MLS1, microbiotas can be evolved under two selection
regimes (left-hand side of the figure below):
1. Among-host selection: microorganisms are transferred from
the most reproductively successful hosts, favouring mutualistic
strains that benefit both host and microorganism.
2. Within-host selection: microorganisms are transferred from hosts
with low reproductive output, favouring strains that enhance their
own replication at a potential cost to the host.
After experimental evolution, microbial communities are
introduced to a standardized host population. Differences in host
fitness and microbial load can reveal the relative strength and
outcome of different levels of selection.

More than two levels of organization can be considered by generalizing Hermsen’s64 framework, allowing for structured populations of
host–microbe groups and within-host microorganism groups, which
is crucial for the application of MLS to real-world systems.

Discussion

Limitations of existing frameworks
Each of the discussed pre-existing frameworks is useful for understanding specific cases of host–microbiome evolution, and one useful
strategy is to select the framework that fits best to the study question and model system used. At the same time, some fundamental
properties of host–microbiota systems necessitate expanding these
frameworks. Further, these frameworks are not mutually exclusive
and, in real-world scenarios where multiple processes and mechanisms
act simultaneously, different frameworks will probably interact. For
example, niche construction has clear applications for understanding
the relationship between host and environmental microbiotas, and
consequential selection of host–microbiota systems. Modification of
the social environment via microbiota transmission may be considered
a form of niche construction but this framework does not focus on
microbiota transmission. The frameworks of IGEs and MEs are particularly useful for understanding the evolutionary consequences of such
social and parent–offspring transmission, respectively. In systems with
mixed modes of microbiota transmission, both IGEs and MEs jointly
affect the dynamics and could be combined to account for such mixed
transmission. Still, IGEs and MEs treat the consequences of microbiota
transmission as fixed effects, limiting their ability to incorporate microbiota community dynamics, host immune response and variation of
transmission other than what is explained by trait covariances.
MLS is useful as an overarching framework for understanding
selection on complex host–microbiota systems. However, it is still
under debate whether MLS1 and MLS2 are inequivalent, as the Price
equation has supported their equivalency since the 1970s63,68–70. Further, although some group-level phenotypes may have relevance at the
individual level, not all will. For example, metabolic complementation
between deep sea clams and their chemosynthetic gill endosymbionts
for haemoglobin-transported sulfur-based carbon fixation is selected
for in the host–microbe assemblage, but not in the individual organisms, because the individual bivalve and bacterial genomes lack genes
to complete the pathway71.

Opportunities for developing new frameworks
Host–microbiota systems provide a number of exciting opportunities
for extending and developing theoretical approaches to describe features that are not sufficiently captured by our focal frameworks, as is also
apparent from the previously described limitations of these frameworks.
1775

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w
MLS2
Decompose host trait changes into among- and within-host selection

Parental host
population

z
+

Host selection

Juvenile host
offspring
Transmission bias

S = cov(W,z)/W

+

T = W∆z/W
=

Mature host
offspring

z'

Fig. 3 | MLS2 in the context of host–microbiota systems. The top row represents
the parent population with mean trait z ̄. Selection among hosts occurs via
differential reproduction, forming host offspring in the middle row. Host-level
selection is quantified by S = cov(W, z)/W̄ , where W is host fitness and W̄ is mean
fitness in the parental population. Subsequently, while offspring develop,
transmission bias occurs due to within-host microbiota dynamics, and this leads
′
to the mature offspring population (bottom row) with mean trait z ̄ .

Transmission bias, capturing within-host selection, is quantified by T = WΔz/W̄ ,
where Δz is the average ontogenetic differential (due to within-host microbiota
dynamics) across offspring of a host parent and WΔz is the average of the
product WΔz across host parents. Note that transmission bias is depicted as
differential microorganism abundance, but it could also arise from
compositional divergence.

For example, microbiota composition varies over the course of a host’s
life72,73. Here, theory on ontogenetic changes in maternal and genetic
contributions to host phenotypic variation74 may provide useful insights
to microbiota changes during host development and its implications
for responses to selection. For instance, a maternal signal in microbiota
composition that diminishes with host age25,75 could be captured by a
negative relationship between host age and the contribution of MEs.
Further, host microbiota composition is shaped by fluctuating microbial abundances resulting in within-host ecological interactions, but
such interactions are ignored in the NGI and MLS frameworks that we
discussed. Further, microbiota vary across host organs75–77 but the frameworks we present do not account for this within-host spatial variation.
These frameworks can be extended to account for such ecological details by integrating models of microbial community dynamics
into host trait architecture. These biotic interactions are even further
complicated by the existence of multiple trophic levels within a microbiota community (for example, interactions of bacteria with phages
or predatory bacteria)78–80. Microorganisms can also show context
dependence in their contributions to host fitness, where they act as
mutualists in one environment but as pathogens in another81–84. Theory
on fluctuating selection85 could be used to assess host–microbiome
evolution in such a case.
In addition, there are many opportunities to expand the theory
of MLS. For example, stochastic simulation of MLS processes could
enable the development of new MLS models and theories to pinpoint
the conditions required for cooperation among microorganisms and
hosts to evolve86. Spatial structure shapes the formation of groups
that can respond to selection pressures64,69,87,88, emphasizing the need
to incorporate environmental parameters in MLS models. Genetic
models for mapping trait selection onto the complex genetic basis
for that trait89 could be used to map group-level phenotypic selection
onto individual genotypes. Incorporating genetic parameters into
MLS models will enable the use of genome-wide datasets. Further, the
effect of host versus symbiont population size and generation time on
the rates of coevolution should be considered26,90.
Lastly, it may be useful to consider microbiota-mediated host traits
as a form of phenotypic plasticity, with host microbiota composition

as the environmental factor. However, as microbiota are transmissible
between host individuals within a generation, and because theoretical
approaches to study reaction norm evolution have not focused on
transmissible factors91–95, there is a need to extend reaction norm
theory to account for the complexity of host–microbiota systems.
Microbiota transmission, either directly from parent to offspring as
in the case of maternal characters or socially as in the case of IGE, can
explain patterns of microbiota variation that then feed back on host–
microbiome evolution52. Moreover, microbiota-mediated plasticity can
act at different levels and timescales96. For example, a new environmental challenge can be accommodated fastest by ecological changes in
microbiota community composition, followed by evolutionary genetic
changes in single microbial lineages. Such microbiota plasticity can
further selectively favour hosts that either select the beneficial microorganisms from the environment or ensure their vertical transmission,
as a kind of microbiota-mediated Baldwin effect96. Hence, application
of the phenotypic plasticity framework to host–microbiome evolution
would need to be extended to account for environmental factors that
are transmissible between hosts within and across generations. Doing
so will be useful for understanding microbiota-mediated adaptation
to new environments11 and microbiota-mediated local adaptation10.

Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

The need for ‘empirically friendly’ theory
We feel that it is important to recognize that existing theoretical frameworks were often developed with biological systems in mind other than
host–microbiota systems97. Not only has this resulted in frameworks
that lack key aspects of the biology of host–microbiota systems (as we
discuss in the previous section) but it has also limited the application
of these frameworks to host–microbiota systems in the laboratory and
the field. To make these frameworks maximally useful, it is important
that the validity of the underlying assumptions of these frameworks
is determined empirically. It is also crucial that these frameworks are
constructed in a way that makes their predictions empirically testable,
given the technical limitations of empirical microbiota research. For
example, for many host–microbiota systems, empiricists are limited to
surveying relative abundance or presence versus absence of microbial
taxa, and for theory to be maximally useful it must generate predictions
1776

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w

MLS1
Decompose microbial selection into among and within-host selection
1 Colonization as a measure of microorganism fitness

cov1(w(k), α)

cov3(w(k), α)

cov2(w(k), α)

cov(w(k), α)

We envision that the initial result will be a mosaic of theoretical frameworks, each tuned to the set of processes considered and questions
asked, with the initial goal of clarifying concepts. Such a mosaic could
eventually lead to the identification of general principles underlying
the interactions between microorganisms and their animal and plant
hosts, greatly expanding our understanding of the evolutionary consequences of the host–microbe associations omnipresent across the
tree of life.

References
1.

w1(k), α1

w2(k), α2

w3(k), α3

cov(w(k), α)

2 Proliferation as a measure of microorganism fitness

Juvenile hosts

cov1(w(γ), α)

cov2(w(γ), α)

cov3(w(γ), α)

cov(w(γ), α)

w1(γ), α1

w2(γ), α2

w3(γ), α3

cov(w(γ), α)

Adult hosts
Within-host selection

Among-host selection

Fig. 4 | MLS1 in the context of host–microbiota systems. Circles represent host
individuals. Microorganism individuals are represented by capsule shapes, and
their trait values α are indicated by colour (red, blue or green). Top: number (1)
illustrates how selection at the levels of host and microorganisms can be
measured when microbial fitness w is taken as the colonization fitness w(κ) (see
main text). Here microorganisms in the immediate host environment (depicted
by the grass and soil at the top of the figure) differentially colonize hosts
(represented by arrows following microorganisms from the environment into
host individuals). Microorganism-level selection resulting from these differential
colonization abilities for the jth host is quantified by covj (w(κ) , α), and these
selection indices are then averaged across hosts to obtain a global measure of
microorganism-level selection cov(w(κ) , α) (highlighted in beige). Host-level
selection is quantified by first averaging microorganism fitness and trait values
within each host (respectively, w̄ i and ᾱi in host i) before taking their covariance
(κ)
across hosts cov(w̄ , α)̄ (highlighted in purple). Bottom: number (2) illustrates
how these levels of selection may be quantified when using proliferation as a
measure of microbial fitness. Juvenile hosts are represented by the top row, and
vertical arrows connect them to their matured selves. Here, changes in host
microbiotas are presumed to be a consequence of within-host microbiota
dynamics, quantified by the growth fitness w(γ) (see main text).

for these microbiota attributes. Tailoring theory in this way will probably require direct collaborations between theoretical and empirical
microbiota scientists to enable an iterative refinement of theory with
information from actual host–microbiota systems. This requires host–
microbiota systems that are sufficiently tractable to measure relevant
quantities, such as correlations among microbiota composition, host
traits and host fitness. Example systems include the water flea Daphnia
(Box 2), the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans13,98, the zebrafish Danio
rerio99, the bobtail squid Euprymna scolopes100 or insect–Wolbachia
associations101.

Conclusion
We presented four frameworks developed in the fields of evolutionary biology that help to generate new insights into host–microbiome
evolution. To capture the biological diversity of such host–microbe systems and produce empirically testable predictions, these frameworks
require thoughtful expansion and, in some cases, the development of
new theory, in close collaboration with empirical microbiota scientists.
Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

Cox, T. O., Lundgren, P., Nath, K. & Thaiss, C. A. Metabolic control
by the microbiome. Genome Med. 14, 80 (2022).
2. Buffie, C. G. et al. Precision microbiome reconstitution restores
bile acid mediated resistance to Clostridium difficile. Nature 517,
205–208 (2014).
3. Hooper, L. V., Littman, D. R. & Macpherson, A. J. Interactions
between the microbiota and the immune system. Science 336,
1268–1273 (2012).
4. Caballero-Flores, G., Pickard, J. M. & Núñez, G.
Microbiota-mediated colonization resistance: mechanisms and
regulation. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 21, 347–360 (2023).
5. Bercik, P. et al. The intestinal microbiota affect central levels
of brain-derived neurotropic factor and behavior in mice.
Gastroenterology 141, 599–609.e3 (2011).
6. Wilkinson, J. E. et al. A framework for microbiome science in
public health. Nat. Med. 27, 766–774 (2021).
7. Singh, B. K., Trivedi, P., Egidi, E., Macdonald, C. A. &
Delgado-Baquerizo, M. Crop microbiome and sustainable
agriculture. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 18, 601–602 (2020).
8. Biggs, E., Taylor, M. W. & Middleton, D. M. R. L. Beyond the theory:
from holobiont concept to microbiome engineering. Environ.
Microbiol. 25, 832–835 (2023).
9. Silverstein, M. R., Segrè, D. & Bhatnagar, J. M. Environmental
microbiome engineering for the mitigation of climate change.
Glob. Change Biol. 29, 2050–2066 (2023).
10. Suzuki, T. A. & Ley, R. E. The role of the microbiota in human
genetic adaptation. Science 370, eaaz6827 (2020).
11. Carmody, R. N., Sarkar, A. & Reese, A. T. Gut microbiota through
an evolutionary lens. Science 372, 462–463 (2021).
12. Henry, L. P., Bruijning, M., Forsberg, S. K. G. & Ayroles, J. F. The
microbiome extends host evolutionary potential. Nat. Commun.
12, 5141 (2021).
13. Petersen, C. et al. Host and microbiome jointly contribute to
environmental adaptation. ISME J. 17, 1953–1965 (2023).
14. Zilber-Rosenberg, I. & Rosenberg, E. Role of microorganisms in
the evolution of animals and plants: the hologenome theory of
evolution. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 32, 723–735 (2008).
15. Aldana, M. & Robeva, R. New challenges in systems biology:
understanding the holobiont. Front. Physiol. 12, 662878
(2021).
16. Bordenstein, S. R. & Theis, K. R. Host biology in light of the
microbiome: ten principles of holobionts and hologenomes. PLoS
Biol. 13, e1002226 (2015).
17. Theis, K. R. et al. Getting the hologenome concept right: an
eco-evolutionary framework for hosts and their microbiomes.
mSystems 1, e00028-16 (2016).
18. McFall-Ngai, M. et al. Animals in a bacterial world, a new
imperative for the life sciences. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110,
3229–3236 (2013).
19. Rosenberg, E. & Zilber-Rosenberg, I. The hologenome concept of
evolution after 10 years. Microbiome 6, 78 (2018).
20. Morris, J. J. What is the hologenome concept of evolution?
F1000Research 7, 1664 (2018).
21. Moran, N. A. & Sloan, D. B. The hologenome concept: helpful or
hollow? PLoS Biol. 13, e1002311 (2015).
1777

Perspective
22. Douglas, A. E. & Werren, J. H. Holes in the hologenome: why
host-microbe symbioses are not holobionts. mBio 7, e02099
(2016).
23. Egan, S., Fukatsu, T. & Francino, M. P. Opportunities and
challenges to microbial symbiosis research in the microbiome
era. Front. Microbiol 11, 1150 (2020).
24. Zeng, Q., Sukumaran, J., Wu, S. & Rodrigo, A. Neutral models of
microbiome evolution. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11, e1004365 (2015).
25. van Vliet, S. & Doebeli, M. The role of multilevel selection in host
microbiome evolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 20591–
20597 (2019).
26. Roughgarden, J. Holobiont evolution: population theory for the
hologenome. Am. Nat. 201, 763–778 (2023).
27. Daybog, I. & Kolodny, O. A computational framework for resolving
the microbiome diversity conundrum. Nat. Commun. 14, 7977
(2023).
28. Miller, E. T., Svanbäck, R. & Bohannan, B. J. M. Microbiomes as
metacommunities: understanding host-associated microbes
through metacommunity ecology. Trends Ecol. Evol. 33, 926–935
(2018).
29. Janzen, D. H. When is it coevolution? Evolution 34, 611–612 (1980).
30. Kirkpatrick, M. & Lande, R. The evolution of maternal characters.
Evolution 43, 485–503 (1989).
31. Odling-Smee, F. J., Lala, K. N. & Feldman, M. Niche Construction:
The Neglected Process in Evolution Monographs in Population
Biology (Princeton Univ. Press, 2013).
32. Wolf, J. B., Brodie III, E. D. & Moore, A. J. Interacting phenotypes
and the evolutionary process. II. Selection resulting from social
interactions. Am. Nat. 153, 254–266 (1999).
33. Bonduriansky, R. & Day, T. Nongenetic inheritance and its
evolutionary implications. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 40, 103–125
(2009).
34. Bruijning, M., Henry, L. P., Forsberg, S. K. G., Metcalf, C. J. E. &
Ayroles, J. F. Natural selection for imprecise vertical transmission
in host-microbiota systems. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 6, 77–87 (2021).
35. Week, B., Ralph, P. L., Tavalire, H. F., Cresko, W. A. & Bohannan,
B. J. M. Quantitative genetics of microbiome mediated traits.
Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.16.628599
(2024).
36. van Opstal, E. J. & Bordenstein, S. R. Rethinking heritability of the
microbiome. Science 349, 1172–1173 (2015).
37. Rothschild, D. et al. Environment dominates over host genetics in
shaping human gut microbiota. Nature 555, 210–215 (2018).
38. Aliakbari, A. Microbiability and microbiome-wide association
analyses of feed efficiency and performance traits in pigs. Genet.
Sel. Evol. 54, 29 (2022).
39. He, Y. et al. Exploring methods to summarize gut microbiota
composition for microbiability estimation and phenotypic
prediction in swine. J. Anim. Sci. 100, skac231 (2022).
40. Lynch, M. & Walsh, B. Genetics and Analysis of Quantitative Traits
Vol. 1 (Sinauer Sunderland, 1998).
41. Odling-Smee, J., Erwin, D. H., Palkovacs, E. P., Feldman, M. W.
& Laland, K. N. Niche construction theory: a practical guide for
ecologists. Q. Rev. Biol. 88, 3–28 (2013).
42. Campos-Cerda, F. & Bohannan, B. J. M. The nidobiome: a
framework for understanding microbiome assembly in neonates.
Trends Ecol. Evol. 35, 573–582 (2020).
43. Bosch, T. C. G. et al. The potential importance of the
built-environment microbiome and its impact on human health.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 121, e2313971121 (2024).
44. Zhu, B. et al. Rhizosphere priming effects on soil carbon and
nitrogen mineralization. Soil Biol. Biochem. 76, 183–192 (2014).
45. Mueller, U. G. & Gerardo, N. Fungus-farming insects: multiple
origins and diverse evolutionary histories. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 99,
15247–15249 (2002).
Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w
46. Finzi, A. C. et al. Rhizosphere processes are quantitatively
important components of terrestrial carbon and nutrient cycles.
Glob. Change Biol. 21, 2082–2094 (2015).
47. Mendes, R. et al. Deciphering the rhizosphere microbiome for
disease-suppressive bacteria. Science 332, 1097–1100 (2011).
48. Linksvayer, T. A. Direct, maternal, and sibsocial genetic effects on
individual and colony traits in an ant. Evolution 60, 2552 (2006).
49. Sokolowski, M. B. Honey bee colony aggression and indirect
genetic effects. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 18148–18150 (2020).
50. Piekarski, P. K., Valdés-Rodríguez, S. & Kronauer, D. J. C.
Conditional indirect genetic effects of caregivers on brood in the
clonal raider ant. Behav. Ecol. 34, 642–652 (2023).
51. Carter, M. J., Wilson, A. J., Moore, A. J. & Royle, N. J. The role
of indirect genetic effects in the evolution of interacting
reproductive behaviors in the burying beetle, Nicrophorus
vespilloides. Ecol. Evol. 9, 998–1009 (2019).
52. Sarkar, A. et al. Microbial transmission in animal social networks
and the social microbiome. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 4, 1020–1035
(2020).
53. Moore, A. J., Brodie, E. D. & Wolf, J. B. Interacting phenotypes and
the evolutionary process: I. Direct and indirect genetic effects of
social interactions. Evolution 51, 1352–1362 (1997).
54. Tung, J. et al. Social networks predict gut microbiome
composition in wild baboons. eLife 4, e05224 (2015).
55. Wanelik, K. M., Raulo, A., Troitsky, T., Husby, A. & Knowles, S. C.
L.Maternal transmission gives way to social transmission during
gut microbiota assembly in wild mice. Anim. Microbiome 5, 29
(2023).
56. Mousseau, T. A. & Fox, C. W. Maternal Effects as Adaptations
(Oxford Univ. Press, 1998).
57. Kijner, S., Kolodny, O. & Yassour, M. Human milk oligosaccharides
and the infant gut microbiome from an eco-evolutionary
perspective. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 68, 102156 (2022).
58. Wagner, M. R. et al. Host genotype and age shape the leaf and
root microbiomes of a wild perennial plant. Nat. Commun. 7, 12151
(2016).
59. Morais, L. H. et al. Enduring behavioral effects induced by birth
by caesarean section in the mouse. Curr. Biol. 30, 3761–3774.e6
(2020).
60. Lewontin, R. C. The units of selection. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 1, 1–18
(1970).
61. Provorov, N. A. & Vorobyov, N. I. Macroevolution of symbiosis as
self-organization of superspecies system controlled by natural
selection. Biol. Bull. Rev. 3, 274–285 (2013).
62. Mayo, D. G. & Gilinsky, N. L. Models of group selection. Philos. Sci.
54, 515–538 (1987).
63. Bourrat, P. Multilevel selection 1, multilevel selection 2, and the
price equation: a reappraisal. Synthese 202, 72 (2023).
64. Hermsen, R. Emergent multilevel selection in a simple spatial
model of the evolution of altruism. PLoS Comput. Biol. 18,
e1010612 (2022).
65. Brown, E. M., Sadarangani, M. & Finlay, B. B. The role of the
immune system in governing host-microbe interactions in the
intestine. Nat. Immunol. 14, 660–667 (2013).
66. Schluter, J. & Foster, K. R. The evolution of mutualism in gut
microbiota via host epithelial selection. PLoS Biol. 10, e1001424
(2012).
67. Frank, S. A. Natural selection. IV. The Price equation. J. Evolut. Biol.
25, 1002–1019 (2012).
68. van Veelen, M., García, J., Sabelis, M. W. & Egas, M. Group
selection and inclusive fitness are not equivalent; the Price
equation vs. models and statistics. J. Theor. Biol. 299, 64–80
(2012).
69. Simon, B., Fletcher, J. A. & Doebeli, M. Towards a general theory of
group selection. Evolution 67, 1561–1572 (2012).
1778

Perspective
70. Lehtonen, J. Multilevel selection in kin selection language. Trends
Ecol. Evol. 31, 752–762 (2016).
71. Ip, J. C.-H. et al. Host–endosymbiont genome integration in a
deep-sea chemosymbiotic clam. Mol. Biol. Evol. 38, 502–518
(2020).
72. Moore, R. E. & Townsend, S. D. Temporal development of the
infant gut microbiome. Open Biol. 9, 190128 (2019).
73. Zimmermann, J. et al. Gut-associated functions are favored during
microbiome assembly across a major part of C. elegans life. mBio
15, e0001224 (2024).
74. Wilson, A. J. & Réale, D. Ontogeny of additive and maternal
genetic effects: lessons from domestic mammals. Am. Nat. 167,
E23 (2006).
75. Ferretti, P. et al. Mother-to-infant microbial transmission from
different body sites shapes the developing infant gut microbiome.
Cell Host Microbe 24, 133–145.e5 (2018).
76. The Human Microbiome Project Consortium Structure, function
and diversity of the healthy human microbiome. Nature 486,
207–214 (2012).
77. Janssens, L. et al. Evolution of pesticide tolerance and associated
changes in the microbiome in the water flea Daphnia magna.
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 240, 113697 (2022).
78. Kirsch, J. M. et al. Bacteriophage-bacteria interactions in the gut:
from invertebrates to mammals. Annu. Rev. Virol. 8, 95–113 (2021).
79. Shkoporov, A. N., Turkington, C. J. & Hill, C. Mutualistic interplay
between bacteriophages and bacteria in the human gut. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 20, 737–749 (2022).
80. Johnke, J., Fraune, S., Bosch, ThomasC. G., Hentschel, U. &
Schulenburg, H. Bdellovibrio and like organisms are predictors
of microbiome diversity in distinct host groups. Microb. Ecol. 79,
252–257 (2019).
81. VORBURGER, C. & GOUSKOV, A. Only helpful when required: a
longevity cost of harbouring defensive symbionts. J. Evolut. Biol.
24, 1611–1617 (2011).
82. Drew, G. C., Stevens, E. J. & King, K. C. Microbial evolution and
transitions along the parasite–mutualist continuum. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 19, 623–638 (2021).
83. Couret, J., Huynh-Griffin, L., Antolic-Soban, I., Acevedo-Gonzalez,
TarikSalam & Gerardo, N. M. Even obligate symbioses show signs
of ecological contingency: impacts of symbiosis for an invasive
stinkbug are mediated by host plant context. Ecol. Evol. 9,
9087–9099 (2019).
84. Griem-Krey, H., Petersen, C., Hamerich, I. K. & Schulenburg, H.
The intricate triangular interaction between protective microbe,
pathogen and host determines fitness of the metaorganism. Proc.
R. Soc. B 290, 20232193 (2023).
85. Gillespie, J. H. Natural selection with varying selection
coefficients—a haploid model. Genet. Res. 21, 115–120 (1973).
86. Daybog, I. & Kolodny, O. Simplified model assumptions artificially
constrain the parameter range in which selection at the holobiont
level can occur. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 11862–11863
(2020).
87. Henriques, G. J. B., van Vliet, S. & Doebeli, M. Multilevel
selection favors fragmentation modes that maintain cooperative
interactions in multispecies communities. PLoS Comput. Biol. 17,
e1008896 (2021).
88. Doekes, H. M. & Hermsen, R. Multiscale selection in spatially
structured populations. Proc. R. Soc. B 291, 20232559 (2024).
89. Kimura, M. & Crow, J. F. The number of alleles that can be
maintained in a finite population. Genetics 49, 725–738 (1964).
90. Lynch, M. Mutation pressure, drift, and the pace of molecular
coevolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci USA 120, e2306741120 (2023).
91. Gavrilets, S. & Scheiner, S. M. The genetics of phenotypic
plasticity. V. Evolution of reaction norm shape. J. Evolut. Biol. 6,
31–48 (1993).
Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w
92. Gomulkiewicz, R. & Kirkpatrick, M. Quantitative genetics and the
evolution of reaction norms. Evolution 46, 390–411 (1992).
93. Lande, R. Adaptation to an extraordinary environment by
evolution of phenotypic plasticity and genetic assimilation. J.
Evolut. Biol. 22, 1435–1446 (2009).
94. Via, S. & Lande, R. Genotype–environment interaction and the
evolution of phenotypic plasticity. Evolution 39, 505–522 (1985).
95. Gomulkiewicz, R. & Stinchcombe, J. R. Phenotypic plasticity
made simple, but not too simple. Am. J. Bot. 109, 1519 (2022).
96. Kolodny, O. & Schulenburg, H. Microbiome-mediated plasticity
directs host evolution along several distinct time scales. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. B 375, 20190589 (2020).
97. Koskella, B., Hall, L. J. & Metcalf, C. JessicaE. The microbiome
beyond the horizon of ecological and evolutionary theory. Nat.
Ecol. Evol. 1, 1606–1615 (2017).
98. Dirksen, P. et al. CeMbio—the Caenorhabditis elegans microbiome
resource. G3 10, 3025–3039 (2020).
99. Stagaman, K., Sharpton, T. J. & Guillemin, K. Zebrafish
microbiome studies make waves. Lab Anim. 49, 201–207 (2020).
100. Visick, K. L., Stabb, E. V. & Ruby, E. G. A lasting symbiosis: how
vibrio fischeri finds a squid partner and persists within its natural
host. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 654–665 (2021).
101. Mirchandani, C. et al. Mixed Wolbachia infections resolve rapidly
during in vitro evolution. PLoS Pathog. 20, e1012149 (2024).
102. Koga, R., Meng, X.-Y., Tsuchida, T. & Fukatsu, T. Cellular
mechanism for selective vertical transmission of an obligate
insect symbiont at the bacteriocyte–embryo interface. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 109, E1230-7 (2012).
103. Sauer, C., Dudaczek, D., Hölldobler, B. & Gross, R. Tissue
localization of the endosymbiotic bacterium ‘Candidatus
Blochmannia floridanus’ in adults and larvae of the carpenter ant
Camponotus floridanus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68, 4187–4193
(2002).
104. Björk, J. R., Díez-Vives, C., Astudillo-García, C., Archie, E. A. &
Montoya, J. M. Vertical transmission of sponge microbiota is
inconsistent and unfaithful. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 3, 1172–1183 (2019).
105. Roughgarden, J., Gilbert, S. F., Rosenberg, E., Zilber-Rosenberg, I.
& Lloyd, E. A. Holobionts as units of selection and a model of their
population dynamics and evolution. Biol. Theory 13, 44–65 (2017).
106. Fukatsu, T. & Hosokawa, T. Capsule-transmitted gut symbiotic
bacterium of the Japanese common plataspid stinkbug,
Megacopta punctatissima. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68, 389–396
(2002).
107. Dominguez-Bello, M. G. et al. Delivery mode shapes the
acquisition and structure of the initial microbiota across multiple
body habitats in newborns. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107,
11971–11975 (2010).
108. Degans, H., Zöllner, E., Gucht, K., Meester, L. & Jürgens, K. Rapid
Daphnia-mediated changes in microbial community structure: an
experimental study. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 42, 137–149 (2002).
109. Weinstein, S. B. et al. Microbiome stability and structure is
governed by host phylogeny over diet and geography in woodrats
(Neotoma spp.). Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2108787118 (2021).
110. Nyholm, S. V. & McFall-Ngai, M. The winnowing: establishing the
squid-vibrio symbiosis. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2, 632–642 (2004).
111. Kikuchi, Y., Hosokawa, T. & Fukatsu, T. Insect–microbe mutualism
without vertical transmission: a stinkbug acquires a beneficial gut
symbiont from the environment every generation. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 73, 4308–4316 (2007).
112. Zhou, P. et al. Perinatal antibiotic exposure affects the
transmission between maternal and neonatal microbiota and is
associated with early-onset sepsis. mSphere 5, e00984-19 (2020).
113. Xu, Y. et al. Antibiotic exposure prevents acquisition of beneficial
metabolic functions in the preterm infant gut microbiome.
Microbiome 10, 103 (2022).
1779

Perspective
114. Zhu, J. et al. Shaping oral and intestinal microbiota and the
immune system during the first 1, 000 days of life. Front. Pediatr.
13, 1471743 (2025).
115. Heidrich, V., Valles-Colomer, M. & Segata, N. Human microbiome
acquisition and transmission. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 23, 568–584
(2025).
116. Selma-Royo, M. et al. Birthmode and environment-dependent
microbiota transmission dynamics are complemented by
breastfeeding during the first year. Cell Host Microbe 32,
996–1010.e4 (2024).
117. Morris, A. H. & Bohannan, B. J. M. Estimates of microbiome
heritability across hosts. Nat. Microbiol. 9, 3110–3119 (2024).
118. Tkaczyk, A., Bownik, A., Dudka, J., Kowal, K. & Ślaska, B. Daphnia
magna model in the toxicity assessment of pharmaceuticals: a
review. Sci. Total Environ. 763, 143038 (2021).
119. Ebert, D. Ecology, Epidemiology, and Evolution of Parasitism in
Daphnia (National Library of Medicine, 2005).
120. Ebert, D. Daphnia as a versatile model system in ecology and
evolution. EvoDevo 13, 16 (2022).
121. Akbar, S. et al. Understanding host–microbiome–environment
interactions: insights from Daphnia as a model organism. Sci.
Total Environ. 808, 152093 (2022).
122. Freese, H. M. & Schink, B. Composition and stability of the
microbial community inside the digestive tract of the aquatic
crustacean Daphnia magna. Microb. Ecol. 62, 882–894 (2011).
123. Frankel-Bricker, J., Song, M. J., Benner, M. J. & Schaack, S.
Variation in the microbiota associated with daphnia magna across
genotypes, populations, and temperature. Microb. Ecol. 79,
731–742 (2019).
124. Sison-Mangus, M. P., Metzger, C. M. J. A. & Ebert, D. Host
genotype-specific microbiota do not influence the susceptibility
of D. magna to a bacterial pathogen. Sci. Rep. 8, 9407 (2018).
125. Gurung, A., Mukherjee, S., Declercq, M., Souffreau, C. & De
Meester, L. Strain-dependent and host genotype-dependent
priority effects in gut microbiome assembly affect host fitness in
Daphnia. Limnol. Oceanogr. 69, 1782–1796 (2024).
126. Sison-Mangus, M. P., Mushegian, A. A. & Ebert, D. Water fleas
require microbiota for survival, growth and reproduction. ISME J.
9, 59–67 (2014).
127. Macke, E., Callens, M., De Meester, L. & Decaestecker, E.
Host-genotype dependent gut microbiota drives zooplankton
tolerance to toxic cyanobacteria. Nat. Commun. 8, 1608 (2017).
128. Liu, Q. et al. Fish predation risk alters the microbiota of daphnia in
the process of inducing its life-history defence traits. Freshw. Biol.
69, 591–605 (2024).
129. Callens, M., Watanabe, H., Kato, Y., Miura, J. & Decaestecker, E.
Microbiota inoculum composition affects holobiont assembly and
host growth in Daphnia. Microbiome 6, 56 (2018).
130. Mushegian, A. A., Walser, Jean-Claude, Sullam, K. E. & Ebert, D.
The microbiota of diapause: how host–microbe associations are
formed after dormancy in an aquatic crustacean. J. Anim. Ecol. 87,
400–413 (2017).

Nature Ecology & Evolution | Volume 9 | October 2025 | 1769–1780

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02846-w
131. Houwenhuyse, S., Stoks, R., Mukherjee, S. & Decaestecker, E.
Locally adapted gut microbiomes mediate host stress tolerance.
ISME J. 15, 2401–2414 (2021).

Acknowledgements

This paper was initiated at the 2023 Symbiosis Theory Workshop. We
thank the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation for their support of
this workshop, and to the workshop participants for their stimulating
discussion. M.B. is supported by NWO Veni grant VI.Veni.222.344.
B.W. and B.J.M.B. are supported by a grant from the Gordon and
Betty Moore Foundation (https://doi.org/10.37807/GBMF10001). B.W.
is further funded through KiTE (that is, Kiel Training for Excellence),
which is part of the European Union’s Horizon Europe research
and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie
grant agreement number 101081480. B.J.M.B. is grateful for the
support of the NIH (P01GM125576). B.J.M.B. and H.S. are grateful for
financial support from the German Science Foundation within the
collaborative research centre CRC 1182 on the Origin and Function of
Metaorganisms (Mercator fellowship to B.J.M.B.; projects A1.1 and A4.3
to H.S.). H.S. further thanks the Max-Planck Society for a Max-Planck
fellowship. S.L.R. thanks the NIH (R00GM135583) for financial support.

Author contributions

B.W., S.L.R., H.S., B.J.M.B. and M.B. conceived the ideas. B.W.
developed the methodology. M.B. created the visualizations.
B.W., S.L.R. and M.B. wrote the first draft of the paper. All authors
contributed substantially to revisions.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information

Correspondence should be addressed to Marjolein Bruijning.
Peer review information Nature Ecology & Evolution thanks Richard
Fuller and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to
the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with
the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the
accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2025

1780

