vol. 203, no. 1

the american naturalist

january 2024

Host-Parasite Coevolution in Continuous Space Leads to
Variation in Local Adaptation across Spatial Scales
Bob Week1,* and Gideon Bradburd2
1. University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403; 2. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
Submitted June 30, 2022; Accepted June 20, 2023; Electronically published November 9, 2023
Online enhancements: supplemental PDF.
abstract: Previous host-parasite coevolutionary theory has focused
on understanding the determinants of local adaptation using spatially
discrete models. However, these studies fall short of describing patterns of host-parasite local adaptation across spatial scales. In contrast, empirical work demonstrates that patterns of adaptation depend on the scale at which they are measured. Here, we propose a
mathematical model of host-parasite coevolution in continuous space
that naturally leads to a scale-dependent deﬁnition of local adaptation. In agreement with empirical research, we ﬁnd that patterns of
adaptation vary across spatial scales. In some cases, not only the magnitude of local adaptation but also the identity of the locally adapted
species will depend on the spatial scale at which measurements are
taken. Building on our results, we suggest a way to consistently measure parasite local adaptation when continuous space is the driver of
cross-scale variation. We also describe a way to test whether continuous space is driving cross-scale variation. Taken together, our results
provide a new perspective that can be used to understand empirical
observations previously unexplained by theoretical expectations and
deepens our understanding of the mechanics of host-parasite local
adaptation.
Keywords: host-parasite coevolution, local adaptation, continuous
space, spatial scale.

Introduction
Interactions between hosts and parasites have shaped patterns of diversity across all scales of biological organization.
For example, coevolution with parasites can alter epidemiological dynamics (Best et al. 2010; Débarre et al. 2012;
Lion and Gandon 2015), promote the evolution of sexual
reproduction (Otto and Nuismer 2004; Lively 2010), yield
novel mutualisms (Yamamura 1993), and inﬂuence patterns
of speciation across a broad range of taxa (Agrawal and
Zhang 2021). In each of these examples, the geography of
* Corresponding author; email: bweek.ecoevo@proton.me.
ORCIDs: Week, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7687-4757; Bradburd, https://
orcid.org/0000-0001-8009-0154.

the interspeciﬁc interactions plays a critical role in determining ecological and evolutionary outcomes. Previous theoretical studies of host-parasite coevolution have incorporated geography using models in which dispersal occurs
between spatially discrete locations (Gandon et al. 1996;
Boots and Sasaki 1999; Nuismer et al. 2000; Gandon 2002;
Gandon and Michalakis 2002; Nuismer 2006; Ridenhour
and Nuismer 2007; Gandon and Nuismer 2009; Débarre
et al. 2012; Lion and Gandon 2015). However, because most
species disperse in continuous space (Nathan et al. 2008)
and because the consequences of spatially continuous systems may only be poorly approximated by discrete space
models, there is a need for models that help us understand
the drivers of host-parasite local adaptation in spatially continuous systems.
A theoretical model of coevolution in continuous space
may also explain empirically observed variation in spatial
patterns of host-parasite adaptation across spatial scales.
Researchers often document a spatial pattern in which
greater support for parasite local adaptation is found at
larger spatial scales and little to no support is found at
shorter spatial scales (Hanks and Denno 1994; Kaltz et al.
1999; Thrall et al. 2002; Schönrogge et al. 2006; Tack et al.
2014). We lack a mechanistic explanation for why this pattern should emerge because previous theory has not explicitly related parasite local adaptation to the geographic
distances that measurements are taken at. Furthermore,
these studies rely on indices of local adaptation that do not
explicitly account for geographic distance. Therefore, there
is a need to further integrate theoretical predictions and empirical observations of spatial patterns of coevolution. In this
article, we aim to close this gap by analyzing the interaction
among host-parasite coevolution, random genetic drift, and
gene ﬂow in a continuous two-dimensional habitat by introducing a novel quantitative genetic model and an index
of local adaptation that explicitly accounts for the geographic distance measurements are taken at.

American Naturalist, volume 203, number 1, January 2024. q 2023 The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. Published by The University of Chicago Press for
The American Society of Naturalists. https://doi.org/10.1086/727470

000

The American Naturalist

We begin by introducing our model, which is a twospecies generalization of Slatkin’s (1978) model of quantitative trait evolution in continuous space. We then introduce our novel measure of local adaptation that explicitly
accounts for geographic distance. Analysis of our model
yields an interspeciﬁc spatial covariance function, called the
cross-covariance function, that allows us to calculate the
covariance of traits for host and parasite populations as a
function of the geographic distance separating those populations. In particular, the cross-covariance function accounts
for spatial autocorrelation of trait values in each species,
which occurs when traits measured at different locations
tend to look more similar the closer they are geographically. Combining our model of host-parasite coevolution
with our continuous space index of local adaptation, we
ﬁnd that parasite local adaptation can be expressed in terms
of the cross-covariance function. Our main ﬁnding is that
parasite local adaptation depends on the spatial scale measurements are taken at relative to the spatial scales of phenotypic autocorrelation for both species. In some cases, not
only the magnitude of local adaptation but also the identity
of the locally adapted species can vary across spatial scales
because of spatially autocorrelated traits. Building on our
theoretical results, we make a suggestion for obtaining a consistent measurement of parasite local adaptation when crossscale variation is due to spatial autocorrelation. In the discussion section, we also suggest an approach to test whether
cross-scale variation is due to spatial autocorrelation and
describe two directions for generalizing our model.

Methods
The Model
Our model tracks the evolution of local mean traits for
a pair of species codistributed across a continuous twodimensional geographic landscape. For each species, the
genomic architecture of their traits is based on an inﬁnitesimal approximation such that the trait of an individual can be thought of as the sum of an inﬁnite number of
allelic effects (with no epistasis or dominance), each of inﬁnitesimal size (reviewed in Barton et al. 2017). The primary components of our model (selection, reproduction,
and dispersal) can be thought of as different stages in the
life cycle of an individual. We assume the life cycle begins by determining ﬁtness in response to selective forces,
including interspeciﬁc interactions, followed by the production of offspring that disperse to new locations, inherit
trait values that are normally distributed around parental trait values, and repeat the cycle of life. However, instead of explicitly tracking individuals, our model focuses on
the dynamics of mean traits averaged across individuals at
each location in a two-dimensional geographic landscape.

In this section, we begin by outlining our approach to
account for biotic and abiotic selection. We then discuss
our model of dispersal and random genetic drift before combining these components into our working model. Model
parameters are summarized in table 1. A more thorough
and technically detailed introduction to and justiﬁcation
for our model is presented in sections S1 and S2 of the supplemental PDF, respectively.
Selection. We assume that ﬁtness consequences for interactions between hosts and parasites are mediated by the
difference in quantitative traits z H 2 zP , where zS is the trait
value of an individual in species S p H, P for host and
parasite, respectively. More precisely, we assume that the
probability of infection increases the more similar traits are
and decreases with trait mismatch. Given a successful infection, we assume that the host incurs a ﬁtness cost and the
parasite receives a ﬁtness beneﬁt. As a consequence, the host
trait will evolve to evade the parasite trait in response to
biotic selection, while the parasite trait evolves to match the
host trait.
To draw biologically meaningful conclusions, we analyze our model at equilibrium. Then, to ensure our model
has an equilibrium, we also account for abiotic selection
that is stabilizing with strengths AH, AP. As our equilibrium
analysis of the model is agnostic to globally averaged trait
values, without loss of generality we assume that stabilizing selection pulls both traits toward zero. Additionally,
our approach to computing spatial covariance functions
(outlined in sec. S3 of the supplemental PDF) requires that
biotic selection be weak relative to abiotic stabilizing selection for both species (BS ≪ AS , S p H, P).
Following classical quantitative genetics, we assume that
trait distributions of local populations are normal with mean
zS (x) for species S at the two-coordinate location x p
(x1 , x2 ). Although this assumption may be violated as dispersal can lead to skewed trait distributions (Débarre et al.
2015), this effect does not occur when dispersal distance
is short relative to the spatial scale of trait variation. As
will be shown in the results section, we ﬁnd that dispersal
distances are always short relative to spatial scales of trait
variation when selection is weak.
Table 1: Model parameters
Symbol
AH
AP
BH
BP
jH
jP
DH
DP

Description
Host abiotic stabilizing selection
Parasite abiotic stabilizing selection
Host biotic selection
Parasite biotic selection
Host dispersal distance
Parasite dispersal distance
Rate of host (phenotypic) drift
Rate of parasite (phenotypic) drift

Host-Parasite Coevolution in Continuous Space
Drift. Random genetic drift can lead to variation in evolutionary trajectories across spatial locations. In our model,
drift provides the ultimate source of geographic variation
in phenotypes; this geographic variation then interacts with
gene ﬂow and selection to yield distinct spatial patterns. The
classic model for the response of a quantitative character to
random genetic drift is given by Lande (1976). This model
states that the change in mean trait in response to drift between consecutive, nonoverlapping generations follows a
normal distribution with variance equal to the ratio of additive genetic variance to effective population size. The continuous time analog of this model is trait evolution following Brownian motion, which has been widely applied as
a phenomenological model in the ﬁeld of phylogenetic comparative methods (Felsenstein 1973; Manceau et al. 2016).
Mechanistically, this result has been formalized in continuous time by Week et al. (2021). In our continuous space
setting, we extend this model so that different locations
experience uncorrelated effects of drift (see sec. S1 of the
supplemental PDF for mathematical details), with rate DS
for species S. We denote the spatial noise process capturing drift for species S by yS(x), which is normalized to have
unit rate. That is, DSyS(x) is the instantaneous evolutionary response to drift for species S at location x.
Dispersal. We assume that displacement between parental
and offspring birthplaces follows a bivariate Gaussian distribution centered on zero with displacement in each direction
drawn independently. These assumptions prevent any net
directionality in dispersal. For species S, we assume that displacements in the two directions are drawn with a standard
deviation jS, which we refer to as the dispersal distance.
Gaussian dispersal leads to change in zS (x) toward a
local average, where the scale of “local” is determined by jS.
The local mean trait will increase or decrease depending
on the concavity of the spatial mean trait surface. As the
concavity of a surface is quantiﬁed by a second spatial derivative, the effect of Gaussian dispersal on the instantaneous
rate of change in local mean trait value is related to the second spatial derivative.
Selection, Dispersal, and Drift. We combine the evolutionary forces described in the previous sections to obtain our
working model as
abiotic
selection

ð1bÞ
ð1bÞ

where AS is the strength of abiotic stabilizing selection, BS
is the strength of biotic selection, jS is the dispersal distance, and DS is the rate of random genetic drift for species S.
A full technical description of our model can be found
in section S1 of the supplemental PDF. The system of equations (1) forms a pair of linear stochastic partial differential
equations (Khoshnevisan 2008; Hairer 2009). In the absence
of coevolution, the well-studied equilibrium solution to this
model is a Gaussian random ﬁeld (Whittle 1954; Whittle
1963; Lindgren et al. 2011; Lindgren 2012). Background
on Gaussian random ﬁelds is provided in section S2 of the
supplemental PDF. As our model of coevolution implies a
linear interaction between two ﬁelds, the methods used by
Whittle (1954, 1963) to study the case of no interaction
can be extended to show that the equilibrium solution of
equations (1) is also a Gaussian random ﬁeld. To illustrate
our model, a single realization of mean trait values across
space for the two species is provided in ﬁgure 1.
Equilibrium solutions to our model are completely characterized by ﬁve quantities: (1) the expected host mean
trait at each location mH, (2) the expected parasite mean
trait at each location mP, (3) the covariance between host
mean traits sampled at any displacement CH(x), (4) the
covariance between parasite mean traits sampled at any
displacement CP(x), and (5) the cross-covariance between
host and parasite mean traits sampled at any displacement CHP(x). As our primary interest is in the spatial covariances of mean traits, we ignore the expected values mH,
mP. In fact, the key quantity derived from our model for
drawing conclusions on host-parasite local adaptation is
the interspeciﬁc cross-covariance between traits CHP(x).
We describe our analytical approach to approximating this
cross-covariance function in section S3 of the supplemental PDF. To make use of this cross-covariance function for
understanding cross-scale variation in patterns of local adaptation, we introduce a new index of local adaptation in the
following section that explicitly accounts for the effects of geographic scale.
Local Adaptation in Continuous Space

biotic
selection

zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
zﬄ}|ﬄ{
∂z H
p 2AH z H 2 BH (z P 2 z H )
∂t
dispersal
zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
drift


zﬄ }|ﬄ {
j2H ∂2 zH
∂2 zH
1
1
1 DH y H ,
2 ∂x21
∂x22

∂z P
p 2AP zP 1 BP (z H 2 zP )
∂t


j2P ∂2 zP
∂2 zP
1
1 2 1 DP y P ,
2 ∂x21
∂x2

000

ð1aÞ

There are two popular deﬁnitions of local adaptation at
the population level (Kawecki and Ebert 2004; Blanquart
et al. 2013; but for a third deﬁnition, see Nuismer and
Gandon 2008). The ﬁrst, known as “home versus away,”
is the mean ﬁtness of a population (where mean ﬁtness
of a population is deﬁned as the average ﬁtness among

000

The American Naturalist

Figure 1: A single realization of our model. Shown are local mean trait values zH (x), zP (x), given by equations (1a) and (1b), respectively,
across geographic space x p (x1 , x2 ), where x1 quantiﬁes eastings and x2 quantiﬁes northings, for the host (left) and parasite (right). Local
mean trait values are colored according to the scale on the right. Here we have made the dispersal distance of the host to be ﬁve times that of
the parasite, with all other pairs of parameters equal.

all individuals in that population) in its local environment
minus the average mean ﬁtness of that population when
transplanted to any other location. An alternative deﬁnition, known as “local versus foreign,” is the mean ﬁtness
of a population in its local environment minus the average mean ﬁtness of populations transplanted from any
other location to that local environment. These deﬁnitions
are particularly well suited for metapopulations, composed
of a ﬁnite number K of discrete locations, because a randomly drawn foreign location (for home versus away) or
population (for local versus foreign, but from here on we
simply write location) occurs with probability 1=K. However, this deﬁnition fails to account for the effects of geographic scale on measurements of local adaptation. Therefore, we introduce a deﬁnition that explicitly accounts for
the geographic scale at which measurements are taken.
To obtain an index of local adaptation for species distributed continuously in space that accounts for geographic
scale, we compute the population growth rate (referred to
as a Malthusian growth rate in Crow and Kimura 1970) for
a population in its local environment (say at location x)
minus the growth rate for the focal population when transplanted to a different location y. This deﬁnition corresponds to a home versus away deﬁnition of local adaptation, as described above. Although classical indices of local
adaptation are deﬁned in terms of ﬁtness as lifetime expected number of offspring, we chose population growth
rate because it leads to relatively simple mathematical expressions. However, given the close correspondence between growth rate and ﬁtness, conclusions drawn using either one should be qualitatively similar.

We denote by mH (z, x) the population growth rate of
hosts with trait z encountering parasites located at x. Similarly, mP (z, x) is the growth rate of parasites with trait z
encountering hosts located at x. Expressions for these growth
rates are given by equations (S33) in section S4 of the supplemental PDF. The population growth rate for individuals of species S transplanted from location x to location
y, written 
m S (x, y), is then the average of mS (z, y) across
trait values of individuals in species S at location x.
As our model considers mean traits as random variables,
 P (x, y)
 H (x, y), m
the averaged population growth rates m
are also random variables. We therefore deﬁne local adaptation in terms of expectations of these growth rates. The
measure of local adaptation we propose, ℓS (x, y), allows
us to calculate the expected difference between population growth rates for individuals of species S drawn from
location x reared locally compared with individuals transplanted to location y. Therefore, this deﬁnition explicitly
accounts for the spatial distance between locations x and y.
Mathematically, our deﬁnition of local adaptation is expressed as
 S (x, x) 2 
m S (x, y)]:
ℓS (x, y) p E[m

ð2Þ

Following this notation, a local versus foreign deﬁnition of local adaptation (as described above) would cor S (x, x) 2 m
 S (y, x)]. However,
respond to ℓS (x, y) p E[m
 S (y, x)] p E[m
 S (x, y)], and
under our model we ﬁnd E[m
thus the two deﬁnitions coincide. This is a consequence
of solutions to our model being spatially isotropic, which
is deﬁned in section S2 of the supplemental PDF. Although

Host-Parasite Coevolution in Continuous Space
the index of local adaptation we introduce here can be
applied to quantify both host and parasite local adaptation,
in practice most empirical researchers focus on measuring parasite local adaptation only. For clarity and brevity,
we then discuss only parasite local adaptation below, but
note here that this index applies equally well to host local
adaptation.
In the results section, we combine this deﬁnition of
local adaptation with the population growth rates found
in section S4 of the supplemental PDF to uncover patterns
of local adaptation between hosts and parasites coevolving
in continuous space.
Results
Spatial Covariance Functions
Intraspeciﬁc Spatial Covariance. Taking our approach
outlined in section S3 of the supplemental PDF, we obtain
analytic approximations for the (intraspeciﬁc) spatial covariance and (interspeciﬁc) spatial cross-covariance functions of host and parasite mean trait values at equilibrium.

We ﬁnd spatial covariance functions for the host and parasite respectively take the forms


pﬃﬃ kxk
pﬃﬃ kxk
2
K1
,
C H (x) p 2V H
lH
lH
C P (x) p



pﬃﬃ kxk
pﬃﬃ kxk
,
2
2V P
K1
lP
lP

0.2

0.25

0.0

0.00

1.0

1.00

−2
−4

0.1

0.75

0.4

0.50

O

Latitude

0.6

0.2

0.25

0.0

0.00

1.0

1.00

0.8

Covariance

0

0.50

O

0.4

2

0.75

0.01

0.6

4

ð3bÞ

1.00

0.8

0.8

ð3aÞ

where kxk is the geographic distance between sampled
locations; VH, VP are the colocated variances (i.e., V S p
CS (0)); lH, lP are the spatial scales of autocorrelation in
each species; and K1 is the modiﬁed Bessel function of the
second kind, order 1 (Abramowitz and Stegun 1965). These
spatial covariance functions belong to the class of Matérn
covariance functions that have been widely employed in
the ﬁelds of spatial statistics (Stein 1999; Lindgren et al.
2011) and machine learning (Rasmussen and Williams
2006). In ﬁgure 2, we illustrate the relationship between
patterns of phenotypic spatial variation and associated spatial covariance functions.

1.0

Trait
Value

000

0.75

1

0.6

0.50

O

0.4

0.25

0.2
0.0

0.00
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Longitude

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

Geographic Distance

Figure 2: Mean trait surfaces z(x) (left), given by equations (1), and associated intraspeciﬁc covariance functions C(x) (right), given by
equations (3), across three different spatial scales of autocorrelation l p 0:01, 0:1, 1, with colocated variance V p 1. This illustrates the
relationship between the spatial scale of phenotypic autocorrelation and the variance of trait values across a ﬁxed region. More precisely,
increasing the spatial scale of autocorrelation l (due to either increased dispersal distance or relaxed selection strengths; see eqq. [4]) leads
to decreased trait variation in a ﬁxed region.

000

The American Naturalist

Our results also demonstrate that the spatial scales of
phenotypic isolation by distance in the host and parasite
can be expressed in terms of model parameters respectively as

source of spatial differentiation in our model, increases with
additive genetic variance and decreases with effective population size (Lande 1976; Week et al. 2021).

jH
l H p pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ,
AH

Interspeciﬁc Spatial Cross-Covariance. In contrast to the
intraspeciﬁc spatial covariance functions above, the spatial cross-covariance function, which quantiﬁes interspeciﬁc trait covariance measured at two potentially different
locations, does not yield a closed-form expression. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that the cross-covariance function is approximated by
ð
BP K 0 (kyk=l P )
C HP (x) p
C H (x 2 y)
2
l 2P
R AP
ð6Þ
BH K 0 (kyk=l H )
2
C P (x 2 y)dy:
AH
l 2H

ð4aÞ

jP
l P p pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ :
AP

ð4bÞ

From these expressions, we see that these spatial scales
are proportional to the dispersal distances in the respective
species; the farther individuals tend to move, the larger the
spatial scales one must observe to ﬁnd signiﬁcant phenotypic variation. We also see that increased abiotic stabilizing selection decreases these spatial scales in each species.
Under the assumption of weak abiotic stabilizing selection
(which would imply AH , AP ≪ 1 and which is required in
our justiﬁcation of population growth rates; see section S4
of the supplemental PDF), our expression for the spatial
scale of phenotypic variation coincides with that found by
Slatkin (1978).
The colocated phenotypic variances, VH and VP, represent uncertainty in mean trait value at a particular location due to different possible realizations of drift. This
should not be confused with the typical notion of phenotypic variance, which represents the variance of trait values
among individuals in a population. As solutions to our
model are spatially homogeneous random ﬁelds (i.e., they
have the same statistical properties at any given spatial
location), mean traits of individuals of species S sampled
at locations separated by distances much greater than lS
escape the effects of spatial autocorrelation and return essentially independent and identically distributed random
variables with variances equal to the colocated variance VS.
That is, the colocated variances also provide measures of
global diversity of mean traits across space. In terms of
our model parameters, the colocated variances can be expressed as
VH p

D2H
,
AH j2H

VP p

D2P
:
AP j2P

ð5Þ

From the expressions for VH and VP, we can identify
relationships between global diversity of mean traits in
each species and the different evolutionary processes of
selection, dispersal, and drift. First, increased dispersal distance jS decreases VS because, in the limit of inﬁnite dispersal
distance, our model collapses to a panmictic population of
inﬁnite size. Additionally, because abiotic selection is stabilizing around spatially homogeneous optima, increased AS
decreases VS. Last, the variance due to drift DS, the ultimate

Although the expression for CHP(x) is quite technical,
we can still draw some basic conclusions. For one, we
see that interspeciﬁc cross-covariance can occur in the
absence of coevolution. For example, in the case where
BH p 0 and BP 1 0, the host trait evolves only in response
to abiotic selection, dispersal, and drift, but the parasite
trait continues to evolve in response to the host trait. In this
case, interspeciﬁc cross-covariance is maintained only by the
parasite tracking the host. We can also use this expression to see that interspeciﬁc cross-covariance requires intraspeciﬁc autocovariance in at least one species (if C H (x) p
CP (x) p 0, then C HP (x) p 0). Consequently, because both
CH (x), CP (x) → 0 in the limit of large geographic distance
(i.e., kxk → ∞), CHP(x) also goes to zero in the limit of
large distances. That is, interspeciﬁc cross-covariance disappears at distances large enough that intraspeciﬁc autocovariance is negligible in both species.
Patterns of Local Adaptation across Spatial Scales
Analytical Results. Combining our model with our deﬁnition of local adaptation in continuous space (see eq. [2]),
we ﬁnd
~H ðC HP (x 2 y) 2 CHP (0)Þ,
ð7aÞ
ℓH (x, y) p B
ℓP (x, y) p B~P ðC HP (0) 2 C HP (x 2 y)Þ,

ð7bÞ

where B~S is BS divided by additive genetic variance in species S (see sec. S1 of the supplemental PDF). As all of the
functions involved with this result depend only on spatial distance d ≥ 0, we simplify our notation by writing
ℓS (d) p ℓS (x, y) when d p kx 2 yk. Similarly, we write
CH(d), CP(d), and CHP(d) for the spatial covariance functions evaluated at geographic distance d. In ﬁgure 3, we
present our index of parasite local adaptation as a function of geographic distance across nine combinations of
lH and lP, with all other parameter pairs made equal.

Host-Parasite Coevolution in Continuous Space
O

O

000

O

O
O
O

Figure 3: Parasite local adaptation ℓP , given by equation (7b), as a function of the geographic distance d between local parasite populations
and the populations of hosts they are confronted with, scaled by biotic selection and colocated variances across nine combinations of
l H , l P p 1, 10, 20, with V H p V P p 1 and BH =AH p BP =AP p 1=250. In the cases where l H p l P , we have ℓH (d) p ℓP (d) p 0 for all
d ≥ 0. In general, when all parameters are made equal between the two species, local adaptation does not emerge at any spatial scale.

Spatial Scale Dependency of Local Adaptation. As shown
in ﬁgure 3, the magnitude of parasite local adaptation depends on the spatial scale measurements are taken at. More
precisely, ﬁgure 3 suggests that local adaptation will be
underestimated for study designs that deﬁne allopatric populations to be within the range of spatial autocorrelation for
either species. In addition, if we allow for asymmetric background parameter values, which we might expect for realistic systems, our model predicts the potential for not only
the magnitude of local adaptation to depend on the spatial
scale measurements are taken, but also the identity of the
locally adapted species. We present two such cases in ﬁgure 4. This result demonstrates that to obtain consistent
estimates of local adaptation, measurements need to be taken
at sufﬁciently large spatial scales.
A Consistent Estimate for Parasite Local Adaptation. The
most rigorous way to estimate parasite local adaptation
would be to confront parasites from a focal population
with hosts sampled at populations from many different locations in a large provenance trial (Blanquart et al. 2013).
However, such an experiment would be incredibly labor
intensive and prone to variable results as predicted by our
model. Fortunately, our model suggests an efﬁcient way
to consistently measure parasite local adaptation. Namely,
when measurements are taken at sufﬁciently large spatial

scales, C HP (d) ≈ 0 so that parasite local adaptation ℓP (d) is
proportional to CHP(0) (see eqq. [7]). That is, parasite
local adaptation can be consistently measured by computing the interspeciﬁc spatial covariance of sympatric
mean traits across locations separated by distances that
are large relative to both spatial scales of intraspeciﬁc autocorrelation lH and lP. Importantly, this approach, similar
to previous approaches based on spatial covariance of allele
frequencies (Blanquart et al. 2013), requires only information on host and parasite mean traits sampled across space
(rather than the outcome of a manipulative experiment)
and is thus much more feasible. Museum and herbarium
collections may offer a vital resource for characterizing host/
parasite phenotypic diversity across space (e.g., Rabosky
et al. 2016). With a geographic map of host and parasite
phenotypes in hand, a researcher could determine the spatial scale at which intraspeciﬁc phenotypic autocorrelation
becomes negligible and thus the spatial scale at which interspeciﬁc spatial covariance of mean traits should be calculated to estimate local adaptation.
Discussion
Here, we have developed a model that tracks the evolution of local mean traits of coevolving species distributed
in two-dimensional continuous space. This model accounts

000

The American Naturalist

Figure 4: Parasite local adaptation ℓP , given by equation (7b), as a function of geographic distance d between local parasite populations and
the populations of hosts they are confronted with, for two cases where the identity of the locally adapted species depends on the spatial scale
at which measurements are taken. The horizontal dotted line marks a measurement of zero parasite local adaptation. Vertical lines mark
spatial scales of intraspeciﬁc autocorrelation in the host (dashed vertical lines) and parasite (dotted vertical lines).

for host-parasite interactions mediated by a trait-matching/
mismatching mechanism, abiotic stabilizing selection, Gaussian dispersal, and random genetic drift. Solutions to this
model are Gaussian random ﬁelds that are characterized
by two intraspeciﬁc spatial autocovariance functions along
with an interspeciﬁc spatial cross-covariance function. We
have also introduced a novel index of local adaptation that
explicitly accounts for the geographic distance separating
allopatric populations. Combining our novel index of local
adaptation in continuous space with the cross-covariance
function obtained from our model, we found that variation
in measurements of parasite local adaptation across spatial
scales can be explained by intraspeciﬁc spatial autocorrelation that emerges when species disperse in continuous
space. More precisely, ﬁgure 3 demonstrates that measurements taken within the range of spatial autocorrelation for
either species will underestimate the magnitude of parasite
local adaptation or maladaptation. Building on this result,
we suggest taking measurements at spatial scales for which
intraspeciﬁc autocorrelation is negligible for both species
to obtain consistent estimates for parasite local adaptation.
The mathematical model we propose may help shed
light on several cases where estimates of parasite local adaptation may have been dependent on the spatial scales at
which they were measured. For example, Tack et al. (2014)
showed that maladaptation of the parasitic powdery mildew Podosphaera plantaginis on the invasive weed Plantago
lanceolata was strong at scales of 6–200 km but weak at
scales of less than 6 km. In another study, Thrall et al.

(2002) found evidence of local adaptation of the autoecious
rust pathogen Melampsora lini on its herbaceous perennial herb host Linum marginale to be more apparent at
scales of 5–10 km than at scales of 200–400 m. Hanks and
Denno (1994) investigated local adaptation of the phytophagous armored scale insect Pseudaulacaspis pentagon on individual mulberry trees of the species Morus alba and found
stronger evidence of local adaptation for insects transplanted
to distant trees (≥300 m) than for insects transplanted to
nearby trees (!5 m). Schönrogge et al. (2006) found the
hoverﬂy Microdon mutabilis to be extremely locally adapted
to its host ant Formica lemani when confronted with host
individuals separated by distances of 3–20 km, moderately
locally adapted at distances of 0.1–3 km, and not locally
adapted at !100 m. Last, Kaltz et al. (1999) studied local
adaptation of the insect-transmitted fungal pathogen Microbotryum violaceum to its host plant Silene latifolia and found
weak parasite local maladaptation when confronted with
nearby populations (!10 km), strong parasite maladaptation when confronted with populations at intermediate
distances (!30 km), and variation in maladaptation for remote populations (!170 km) ranging from strong to weak
maladaptation.
These empirical studies demonstrate the key ﬁnding of
our model: that there can be variation in the magnitude of
local adaptation across spatial scales in naturally occurring
systems. For example, in all of the studies referenced in the
preceding paragraph, the estimated strength of local adaptation is a function of the geographic distance between the

Host-Parasite Coevolution in Continuous Space
populations for which it is assessed. A second useful prediction from our model is that because of the phenotypic
spatial autocorrelation within each species, measurements
of local adaptation taken at larger distances will provide
more consistent estimates. Therefore, in each of the cases
referenced above (in which local adaptation varies as a
function of the spatial scale at which it is measured) we
would recommend summarizing local adaptation in the
system using comparisons between the most distant population pairs. However, because our model includes stochasticity (due to random genetic drift), it also predicts that
there should be some amount of variation in individual
measurements of local adaptation, even at large spatial scales.
Kaltz et al. (1999) highlight this variation, ﬁnding high variance in infection success of the Microbotryum parasite on
Silene hosts at the largest spatial distances. These infection
success measurements do appear to increase, on average,
with distance, and given the second prediction above, the
model would support summarizing these results using the
mean measurements at the largest spatial lags.
In addition to providing a theoretical explanation for
the observation of spatial variation in host-parasite local
adaptation, our model predicts that the shorter-dispersing
species should be locally adapted to the farther-dispersing
species, assuming that all other parameters are equal (see
ﬁg. 3). Of the ﬁve studies listed above (by no means an
exhaustive list), two (Hanks and Denno 1994; Tack et al.
2014) ﬁt this prediction. In Hanks and Denno (1994) the
parasite disperses a shorter distance than its host and is locally adapted, and in Tack et al. (2014) the parasite disperses a longer distance than its host and is locally maladapted. Deviations from this prediction may then imply
interspeciﬁc asymmetry of model parameters other than
dispersal distances. Equation (S13) in section S3 of the supplemental PDF shows that the identity of the locally adapted
species depends on symmetry of each pair of model parameters (abiotic selection strengths AH, AP; biotic selection
strengths BH, BP; dispersal distances jH, jP; and rates of drift
DH, DP). Consequently, our model suggests that the identity
of the locally adapted species in the other three studies
(Kaltz et al. 1999; Thrall et al. 2002; Schönrogge et al. 2006),
in each of which the locally adapted species disperses farther than its partner, is mediated by differential selection
strengths or differential rates of drift.
Our suggested approach for obtaining consistent measurements of parasite local adaptation rests on the hypothesis that intraspeciﬁc spatial autocorrelation explains
variation in measurements of coadaptation across spatial
scales. This hypothesis, implied by our theoretical ﬁndings, can be tested using geographically referenced phenotypic data. More precisely, standard methods applied
in the analysis of spatial data (e.g., Dale and Fortin 2014)
may be used to determine the distances for which spatial

000

autocorrelation is negligible in each species. In turn, these
estimates can be compared to the geographical distances
between allopatric populations deﬁned in previous empirical studies. Our hypothesis would be rejected if variation in measurements of local adaptation occurs across
several spatial scales that are larger than both of the spatial scales of autocorrelation in the host and parasite species. In this case, additional theoretical studies would be
required to explain such cross-scale variation.
Additional hypotheses for the cross-scale variation in
spatial patterns of adaptation can be developed by extending our model in several directions. For example, heavytailed dispersal kernels, which are likely common in nature (Houtan et al. 2007; Bullock et al. 2016; García and
Borda-de-Água 2016; Jordano 2016), can be incorporated
into our model by replacing the dispersal operator with
fractional spatial derivatives (for mathematical details, see
Laskin 2000; Bayın 2016). As fractional derivatives are deﬁned in terms of spectral representations, our approach,
which recovers covariance functions from spectral representations, is particularly well suited to this generalization
of our model. Such a generalization of our model may
then be used to predict variation in patterns of adaptation
as a consequence of dispersal mode. Another direction this
work can be taken is to consider spatial variation of the
abiotic environment by modeling abiotic optima as additional Gaussian random ﬁelds (making for four random
ﬁelds in total; one for the host trait, one for the parasite
trait, one for the host abiotic optimum, and one for the
parasite abiotic optimum). This second direction would
allow for theoretical predictions of spatial variation in local adaptation based on spatial scales of abiotic environmental variation. Hu et al. (2013) provides further information on the mathematical details involved with both of
these extensions.
Although there is already a large body of theory on
geographically structured host-parasite coevolution (e.g.,
Gandon et al. 1996; Nuismer et al. 2000; Gandon 2002;
Gandon and Michalakis 2002; Nuismer et al. 2003; Nuismer
2006; Ridenhour and Nuismer 2007; Gandon and Nuismer
2009; Débarre et al. 2012; Lion and Gandon 2015), these
studies are limited in their ability to explain variation in
patterns of host-parasite adaptation across spatial scales
because they depend on indices of local adaptation that
do not explicitly account for geographic distance. In contrast, empirical studies have emphasized that such crossscale variation is common (Hanks and Denno 1994; Kaltz
et al. 1999; Thrall et al. 2002; Schönrogge et al. 2006; Tack
et al. 2014). Our model, combined with our novel index of
local adaptation, is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst to provide a
mechanistic explanation for measurements of parasite local
adaptation that vary across spatial scales. Furthermore, it is
consistent with empirical observations that local adaptation

000

The American Naturalist

in host-parasite systems tends to be stronger at larger spatial scales relative to shorter spatial scales.
In addition to the geographically explicit index of local adaptation we have introduced here, our mathematical
model of continuous space coevolution has several novel
features. In comparison to previous models of coevolution
in continuous space (Nuismer et al. 2000, 2003), our model
differs in three major ways. First, whereas previous continuous space models have focused on interspeciﬁc interactions mediated by allelic variation at genetic loci, our model
focuses on coevolution of a pair of quantitative traits that
determine the outcomes of interactions. Second, while previous work has focused on a single continuous spatial axis,
our model accounts for the more biologically relevant case
of two continuous spatial axes. Last, our model accounts for
the stochastic dynamics of random genetic drift, which rarely
yields tractable evolutionary models in two-dimensional
continuous space (Felsenstein 1975; Etheridge 2004; Barton
et al. 2010). It is therefore likely that investigations relaxing important assumptions of our model, such as spatially
homogeneous abundance densities and weak biotic selection, will require the study of individual-based simulations.

Conclusion
In summary, our work here provides initial steps toward
understanding coevolution and local adaptation in continuous space using an analytically tractable mathematical
model. Our theoretical ﬁndings form testable hypotheses
for previously unexplained variation observed in empirical
host-parasite systems and suggest an approach to consistently measure parasite local adaptation in the wild. Taken
together, this work establishes a novel theoretical approach
to model spatial coevolution and lends a new perspective for
understanding spatial patterns of interspeciﬁc coadaptation.

Acknowledgments
We thank Anurag Agrawal, Ailene MacPherson, Scott
Nuismer, Peter Ralph, and Victoria Caudill for their thoughtful and detailed feedback on the manuscript, which greatly
improved this project. We also thank Associate Editor Greg
Dwyer for proposing a reframing of our article focused on
spatial scale dependency and two anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments, the culmination of which has
lead to a much more impactful contribution. Research reported was supported by the National Institute of General
Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) under award R35GM137919 (awarded to G.B.).
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the NIH.

Statement of Authorship
B.W. contributed to conceptualization, model development/
analysis, visualization, coding simulation, writing—original draft, and writing—review and editing. G.B. contributed
to conceptualization, supervision, writing—original draft,
writing—review and editing, and funding acquisition.

Data and Code Availability
Data and code for reproducing each of the ﬁgures in this
article and for deriving some key analytical results have
been collected in a Zenodo repository (https://doi.org/10
.5281/zenodo.8008017; Week and Bradburd 2023).
Literature Cited
Abramowitz, M., and I. A. Stegun. 1965. Handbook of mathematical functions with formulas, graphs, and mathematical tables.
Dover, Mineola, NY.
Agrawal, A. A., and X. Zhang. 2021. The evolution of coevolution
in the study of species interactions. Evolution 75:1594–1606.
Barton, N. H., A. M. Etheridge, and A. Véber. 2010. A new model
for evolution in a spatial continuum. Electronic Journal of Probability 15:162–216.
———. 2017. The inﬁnitesimal model: deﬁnition, derivation, and
implications. Theoretical Population Biology 118:50–73.
Bayın, S. Ş. 2016. Deﬁnition of the Riesz derivative and its application to space fractional quantum mechanics. Journal of Mathematical Physics 57:123501.
Best, A., S. Webb, A. White, and M. Boots. 2010. Host resistance
and coevolution in spatially structured populations. Proceedings
of the Royal Society B 278:2216–2222.
Blanquart, F., O. Kaltz, S. L. Nuismer, and S. Gandon. 2013. A
practical guide to measuring local adaptation. Ecology Letters
16:1195–1205.
Boots, M., and A. Sasaki. 1999. “Small worlds” and the evolution of
virulence: infection occurs locally and at a distance. Proceedings
of the Royal Society B 266:1933–1938.
Bullock, J. M., L. M. González, R. Tamme, L. Götzenberger, S. M.
White, M. Pärtel, and D. A. P. Hooftman. 2016. A synthesis of
empirical plant dispersal kernels. Journal of Ecology 105:6–19.
Crow, J. F., and M. Kimura. 1970. An introduction to population
genetics theory. Harper & Row, New York.
Dale, M., and M.-J. Fortin. 2014. Spatial analysis. 2nd ed. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Débarre, F., S. Lion, M. van Baalen, and S. Gandon. 2012. Evolution
of host life-history traits in a spatially structured host-parasite
system. American Naturalist 179:52–63.
Débarre, F., S. Yeaman, and F. Guillaume. 2015. Evolution of quantitative traits under a migration-selection balance: when does skew
matter? American Naturalist 186:S37–S47.
Etheridge, A. M. 2004. Survival and extinction in a locally regulated
population. Annals of Applied Probability 14:188–214.
Felsenstein, J. 1973. Maximum-likelihood estimation of evolutionary
trees from continuous characters. American Journal of Human
Genetics 25:471–492.

Host-Parasite Coevolution in Continuous Space
———. 1975. A pain in the torus: some difﬁculties with models of
isolation by distance. American Naturalist 109:359–368.
Gandon, S. 2002. Local adaptation and the geometry of host-parasite
coevolution. Ecology Letters 5:246–256.
Gandon, S., Y. Capowiez, Y. Dubois, Y. Michalakis, and I. Olivieri.
1996. Local adaptation and gene-for-gene coevolution in a metapopulation model. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 263:1003–1009.
Gandon, S., and Y. Michalakis. 2002. Local adaptation, evolutionary
potential and host-parasite coevolution: interactions between migration, mutation, population size and generation time. Journal
of Evolutionary Biology 15:451–462.
Gandon, S., and S. L. Nuismer. 2009. Interactions between genetic
drift, gene ﬂow, and selection mosaics drive parasite local adaptation. American Naturalist 173:212–224.
García, C., and L. Borda-de-Água. 2016. Extended dispersal
kernels in a changing world: insights from statistics of extremes.
Journal of Ecology 105:63–74.
Hairer, M. 2009. An introduction to stochastic PDEs. arXiv, https://
doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.0907.4178.
Hanks, L. M., and R. F. Denno. 1994. Local adaptation in the armored
scale insect Pseudaulacaspis pentagona (Homoptera: Diaspididae).
Ecology 75:2301–2310.
Houtan, K. S. V., S. L. Pimm, J. M. Halley, R. O. Bierregaard, and
T. E. Lovejoy. 2007. Dispersal of amazonian birds in continuous
and fragmented forest. Ecology Letters 10:219–229.
Hu, X., D. Simpson, F. Lindgren, and H. Rue. 2013. Multivariate
Gaussian random ﬁelds using systems of stochastic partial differential equations. arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1307.1379.
Jordano, P. 2016. What is long-distance dispersal? and a taxonomy
of dispersal events. Journal of Ecology 105:75–84.
Kaltz, O., S. Gandon, Y. Michalakis, and J. A. Shykoff. 1999. Local
maladaptation in the anther-smut fungus Microbotryum violaceum
to its host plant Silene latifolia: evidence from a cross-inoculation
experiment. Evolution 53:395–407.
Kawecki, T. J., and D. Ebert. 2004. Conceptual issues in local adaptation. Ecology Letters 7:1225–1241.
Khoshnevisan, D. 2008. A primer on stochastic partial differential
equations. Pages 1–38 in Lecture notes in mathematics. Springer,
Berlin.
Lande, R. 1976. Natural selection and random genetic drift in phenotypic evolution. Evolution 30:314–334.
Laskin, N. 2000. Fractional quantum mechanics. Physical Review
E 62:3135–3145.
Lindgren, F., H. Rue, and J. Lindström. 2011. An explicit link
between Gaussian ﬁelds and Gaussian Markov random ﬁelds:
the stochastic partial differential equation approach. Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society B 73:423–498.
Lion, S., and S. Gandon. 2015. Evolution of spatially structured hostparasite interactions. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 28:10–28.
Lively, C. M. 2010. Antagonistic coevolution and sex. Evolution:
Education and Outreach 3:19–25.
Manceau, M., A. Lambert, and H. Morlon. 2016. A unifying comparative phylogenetic framework including traits coevolving across
interacting lineages. Systematic Biology 66:551–568.
Nathan, R., W. M. Getz, E. Revilla, M. Holyoak, R. Kadmon,
D. Saltz, and P. E. Smouse. 2008. A movement ecology paradigm
for unifying organismal movement research. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA 105:19052–19059.
Nuismer, S. L. 2006. Parasite local adaptation in a geographic mosaic.
Evolution 60:24–30.

000

Nuismer, S. L., and S. Gandon. 2008. Moving beyond commongarden and transplant designs: insight into the causes of local
adaptation in species interactions. American Naturalist 171:658–668.
Nuismer, S. L., J. N. Thompson, and R. Gomulkiewicz. 2000. Coevolutionary clines across selection mosaics. Evolution 54:1102–1115.
———. 2003. Coevolution between hosts and parasites with partially overlapping geographic ranges. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 16:1337–1345.
Otto, S. P., and S. L. Nuismer. 2004. Species interactions and the
evolution of sex. Science 304:1018–1020.
Rabosky, A. R. D., C. L. Cox, D. L. Rabosky, P. O. Title, I. A.
Holmes, A. Feldman, and J. A. McGuire. 2016. Coral snakes
predict the evolution of mimicry across new world snakes. Nature Communications 7:11484.
Rasmussen, C. E., and C. K. Williams. 2006. Gaussian processes
for machine learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ridenhour, B. J., and S. L. Nuismer. 2007. Polygenic traits and parasite local adaptation. Evolution 61:368–376.
Schönrogge, K., M. G. Gardner, G. W. Elmes, E. K. V. Napper,
D. J. Simcox, J. C. Wardlaw, J. Breen, et al. 2006. Host propagation permits extreme local adaptation in a social parasite of ants.
Ecology Letters 9:1032–1040.
Slatkin, M. 1978. Spatial patterns in the distributions of polygenic
characters. Journal of Theoretical Biology 70:213–228.
Stein, M. L. 1999. Interpolation of spatial data. Springer, New York.
Tack, A. J. M., F. Horns, and A.-L. Laine. 2014. The impact of spatial scale and habitat conﬁguration on patterns of trait variation
and local adaptation in a wild plant parasite. Evolution 68:176–189.
Thrall, P. H., J. J. Burdon, and J. D. Bever. 2002. Local adaptation in
the Linum marginale–Melampsora lini host-pathogen interaction.
Evolution 56:1340–1351.
Week, B., and G. Bradburd. 2023. Data from: Host-parasite coevolution in continuous space leads to variation in local adaptation
across spatial scales. American Naturalist, Zenodo, https://doi.org
/10.5281/zenodo.8008017.
Week, B., S. L. Nuismer, L. J. Harmon, and S. M. Krone. 2021. A
white noise approach to evolutionary ecology. Journal of Theoretical Biology 521:110660.
Whittle, P. 1954. On stationary processes in the plane. Biometrika
41:434–449.
———. 1963. Stochastic-processes in several dimensions. Bulletin
of the International Statistical Institute 40:974–994.
Yamamura, N. 1993. Vertical transmission and evolution of mutualism from parasitism. Theoretical Population Biology 44:95–109.

References Cited Only in the Online Enhancements
Bolker, B., and S. W. Pacala. 1997. Using moment equations to understand stochastically driven spatial pattern formation in ecological systems. Theoretical Population Biology 52:179–197.
Da Prato, G., and J. Zabczyk. 2014. Stochastic equations in inﬁnite
dimensions. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Evans, L. C. 2010. Partial differential equations. Vol. 19. American
Mathematical Society, Providence, RI.
Lindgren, G. 2012. Stationary stochastic processes: theory and applications. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Méléard, S., and S. Roelly. 1993. Interacting measure branching
processes: some bounds for the support. Stochastics and Stochastic
Reports 44:103–121.

000

The American Naturalist

Rue, H., and L. Held. 2005. Gaussian Markov random ﬁelds: theory
and applications. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Walsh, J. B. 1986. An introduction to stochastic partial differential
equations. Pages 265–439 in École d’Été de probabilités de saint
ﬂour XIV-1984. Springer, Berlin.

Week, B., and S. L. Nuismer. 2021. Coevolutionary arms races and
the conditions for the maintenance of mutualism. American Naturalist 198:195–205.
Associate Editor: Greg Dwyer
Editor: Erol Akçay

“New species of Brugmansia, of the family of the Rafﬂesiaceæ.” From the review of Forbes’ A Naturalist’s Wanderings in the Eastern
Archipelago (The American Naturalist, 1885, 19:975–977).

