vol. 198, no. 2

the american naturalist

august 2021

Coevolutionary Arms Races and the Conditions
for the Maintenance of Mutualism
Bob Week1,* and Scott L. Nuismer1,2
1. Program in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho 83844; 2. Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho 83844
Submitted September 5, 2020; Accepted February 25, 2021; Electronically published May 27, 2021
Online enhancements: supplemental PDF.
abstract: Empirical evidence suggests that coevolutionary arms
races between ﬂowering plants and their pollinators can occur in
wild populations. In extreme cases, trait escalation may result in
evolutionary switching from mutualism to parasitism. However,
theoretical approaches to studying coevolution typically assume ﬁxed
types of ecological interactions and ignore the evolution of absolute
ﬁtness. Here, we introduce a novel approach to track the evolution of
absolute ﬁtness as a framework to determine when escalatory coevolution results in a switch from mutualism to parasitism. We apply
our approach to two previously studied mechanisms mediating selection as a function of phenotype. Our results demonstrate that interactions mediated by a “bigger-is-better” mechanism evolve toward
parasitism. In contrast, generalizing the classical trait-matching mechanism so that the ﬁtness of each species is optimized when trait values mismatch by a particular amount, we ﬁnd theoretical support
for indeﬁnite trait exaggeration that preserves mutualistic interactions. Building on our results, we discuss the consequences of coevolutionary arms races for the maintenance of cheating. Moving beyond
pairwise interactions, we consider the ramiﬁcations of coevolution in
a South African pollination network for the evolution of parasitism.
Future work extending our approach beyond pairwise interactions
can lead to a framework for understanding the evolution of parasitism
in mutualistic networks and further insights into the structure and dynamic nature of ecological communities in general.
Keywords: coevolution, mutualism, arms race, offset matching.

Introduction
Coevolution between pairs of species has long been considered an important driver of phenotypic exaggeration
(Darwin 1862; Wallace 1867; Benkman et al. 2003; Brodie
et al. 2005; Toju and Sota 2006; Anderson and Johnson 2007,
2009; Pauw et al. 2009; Anderson et al. 2010; Muchhala and
Thomson 2010; Thompson 2014; Nuismer 2017; Nuismer
* Corresponding author; email: bobweek@gmail.com.
ORCIDs: Week, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7687-4757; Nuismer, https://
orcid.org/0000-0001-9817-0056.
Am. Nat. 2021. Vol. 198, pp. 195–205. q 2021 by The University of Chicago.
0003-0147/2021/19802-60172$15.00. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1086/714274

and Week 2019; Week and Nuismer 2019). In particular,
coevolutionary theory predicts that antagonistic victimexploiter interactions, such as host-parasite and predatorprey interactions, often result in coevolutionary cyclic chases
(Gavrilets 1997; Gavrilets and Hastings 1998) or escalatory
arms races (Nuismer et al. 2007). If an arms race goes unchecked by external sources of stabilizing selection, the interacting species are predicted to evolve ever greater defensive and offensive trait values. However, this dynamic is not
unique to antagonistic interactions. Indeed, several cases of
apparent trait escalation involving mutualistic interactions
have been documented (Anderson and Johnson 2007, 2009;
Pauw et al. 2009). Furthermore, the classiﬁcation of an interaction as a mutualism or an antagonism may change as partner species evolve or as the ecological context in which the
interaction occurs changes over space and time (Bronstein
1994; Gomulkiewicz et al. 2003; Nuismer et al. 1999, 2003).
For example, the interactions between the pollinating seed
parasite Greya politella and the plant it pollinates, Lithophragma parviﬂourm, changes from mutualism to parasitism as the abundance of copollinators decreases (Thompson and Pellmyr 1992). Alternatively, if one mutualistic
partner outpaces the other in an evolutionary race, the
carefully balanced mutual beneﬁts may disintegrate leading to the evolutionary switching from mutualism to parasitism (Pauw et al. 2009; Jones et al. 2015).
Here, we study the disintegration of mutualisms due to
escalatory coevolution. We focus on two mechanisms mediating ﬁtness as a function of phenotype. In one model,
the arms race is driven by a “bigger-is-better” (i.e., trait differences sensu Nuismer et al. 2007) mechanism where ﬁtness increases indeﬁnitely with trait size. In the other model,
the arms race is driven by an “offset-matching” mechanism (sensu Week and Nuismer 2019), where ﬁtness is
a unimodal function peaking at some value larger than
the trait of the interacting partner. Our goal is to determine whether these interaction mechanisms yield coevolutionary dynamics that preserve or destroy mutualistic
interactions.

196

The American Naturalist

Although coevolutionary models of victim-exploiter interactions often predict indeﬁnite trait escalation, most coevolutionary models of mutualistic interactions rarely, if
ever, predict coevolutionary arms races and sustained escalation of traits (Nuismer 2017). A notable exception is Kiester et al. (1984), where it was demonstrated that sexual selection in pollinator populations can lead to escalation of
pollinator preference. When plant traits evolve to track pollinator preference, sexual selection in the pollinator population may then indirectly lead to the evolutionary escalation
of plant traits. However, the escalatory dynamics described
in this situation are driven by sexual selection within species
and not coevolutionary selection between species. Furthermore, Kiester et al. (1984) concluded that in the absence of
sexual selection, coevolution in mutualisms would lead to
the stable convergence of trait values. Recent coevolutionary models focused on dynamics driven solely by interspeciﬁc interactions continue this tradition of modeling the
phenotypic interface of mutualisms with a trait-matching
mechanism (Guimarães et al. 2017; Nuismer 2017; Medeiros et al. 2018; de Andreazzi et al. 2019). Hence, it is generally assumed that coevolving mutualists do not engage
in cycles or arms races.
While this dichotomy between antagonistic and mutualistic interactions is generally accepted, striking counterexamples exist in a range of empirically well-studied mutualistic interactions characterized by extremely exaggerated
traits (Anderson and Johnson 2007, 2009; Pauw et al. 2009;
Muchhala and Thomson 2010). For instance, in the interaction between the long-proboscid ﬂy Prosoeca ganglbaueri
and the ﬂowering plant Zaluzianskya microsiphon, Anderson
and Johnson (2007) found extreme trait exaggeration, including proboscis lengths of up to 50 mm and ﬂoral tube
depths of up to 55 mm. Furthermore, these authors discovered signiﬁcant spatial correlations in mean proboscis
length and ﬂoral tube depth, suggesting a role for coevolution
in explaining patterns of phenotypic exaggeration. Similarly,
Pauw et al. (2009) found signiﬁcant spatial correlations between another long-proboscid ﬂy, Moegistorhynchus longirostris, and a long-tubed ﬂower, Lapeirousia anceps. Using
a clever experimental design, Pauw et al. (2009) also demonstrated evidence for reciprocal directional selection caused
by this interaction for longer ﬂoral tubes and pollinator proboscises. Hence, evolutionary exaggeration in these systems
may be explained by interspeciﬁc coevolutionary selection
instead of intraspeciﬁc sexual selection.
These examples suggest that coevolutionary trait exaggeration in mutualisms is more widespread than previously thought. However, if trait escalation of one partner
outpaces that of the other, the interaction may cease to be
beneﬁcial for the second partner. That is, the mutualism
may collapse into a parasitism (Jones et al. 2015). For instance, if the ﬂy mouthpart evolves to exceed the nectar-

tube depth by an extreme amount, the ﬂy may be better
described as a nectar thief rather than a pollinator (Inouye
1980; Pauw et al. 2009). Hence, these mutualisms may be
maintained by a delicate coevolutionary dance between
partner species.
In a convincing counterargument drawing on metaanalyses of selection gradients and macroevolutionary
patterns, Frederickson (2017) challenged the notion that
mutualisms are on the verge of breakdown. Instead, Frederickson (2017) argues that a host-parasite interaction is
more likely to experience an evolutionary switch to mutualism than the other way around. Combining this argument
with our knowledge of coevolutionary arms races in mutualisms leads us to two key questions: Can sustained arms
races within mutualistic interactions continue indeﬁnitely
without disintegrating into antagonisms? And if so, which
mechanisms mediating ﬁtness as a function of phenotype
favor the stability of mutualism in the face of ongoing arms
races for ever-increasing trait values?
Here, we answer these questions by analyzing the traitdifferences and offset-matching models of mutualistic
arms races. By tracking the absolute ﬁtness of interacting
species in response to trait evolution, our results demonstrate that unchecked mutualistic arms races mediated by
a weak selection approximation to trait differences are
doomed to a parasitic fate. In contrast, offset matching
(with weak or strong selection) can preserve mutualistic
interactions in spite of ever-increasing trait values.

Methods
Our analysis focuses on two interaction mechanisms determining the ﬁtness of individuals as functions of their
phenotype and the phenotype of an encountered individual: the trait-differences mechanism (Nuismer et al. 2007)
and the offset-matching mechanism (Week and Nuismer
2019). We therefore begin the description of our methods
with a brief review of trait differences and offset matching.
We then describe our approach to modeling coevolutionary dynamics and present population growth rates associated with each interaction mechanism. We show that these
growth rates can be additively decomposed into a component representing the overall effect on ﬁtness due to the
interaction and a component representing effects due to
sources outside the interaction. By tracking the component
describing the overall effect of the interaction on absolute
ﬁtness, we develop a method to model the evolutionary
switching of interaction types and the transition from mutualism to parasitism in particular. In the results section,
we combine our models of coevolutionary dynamics with
our approach to model the evolutionary switching of interaction types to determine when trait differences and offset

Mutualistic Arms Races
matching promote an evolutionary switch from mutualism
to antagonism.
Trait Differences
The trait-differences mechanism assumes that the component of ﬁtness due to a biotic interaction changes
monotonically with the trait value of the focal individual.
Nuismer et al. (2007) used trait differences to derive quantitative genetic models of coevolutionary trait escalation
driven by antagonistic interactions. The coevolutionary
behavior implied by the trait-differences mechanism exhibits two characteristic features. First, the mean traits will
diverge toward ever larger values. Second, in the limit of
weak selection, the rate of trait evolution for one species
does not depend on the trait value of the other, leading
to independent evolutionary trajectories.
The trait-differences mechanism has frequently been
modeled using a logistic curve describing the probability
of a successful interaction given the trait values of the interacting individuals (Toju and Sota 2006; Nuismer et al.
2007; Nuismer 2017; Nuismer and Week 2019). However,
the same bigger-is-better mechanism can also be modeled
with an exponential curve. Although not as biologically realistic, the latter option simpliﬁes analysis and yields the
same dynamics as the logistic curve in the limit of weak selection (Nuismer et al. 2007; Week and Nuismer 2019). We

197

therefore make use of the exponential curve instead of the
logistic curve in our derivations.
Denoting x the trait value of an individual of species X,
denoting y the trait value of an individual of species Y, and
assuming each individual engages in a single interaction,
individual ﬁtness can be captured by
W X (x, y) ∝ exp(BX (x 2 y)),

ð1aÞ

W Y (y, x) ∝ exp(BY (y 2 x)),

ð1bÞ

where BX, BY 1 0 determine the sensitivity of ﬁtness to
trait values and hence mediate the strengths of selection
on the respective species. We therefore refer to these parameters as the strengths of biotic selection. This interaction mechanism is summarized graphically in ﬁgure 1.
Offset Matching
The offset-matching mechanism generalizes the traitmatching mechanism frequently used to model coevolutionary interactions (Kiester et al. 1984; Week and Nuismer 2019). In particular, offset matching relaxes the key
assumption that trait values from interacting pairs must
be perfectly matched to optimize ﬁtness for both species.
Instead, ﬁtness for each species is optimized when their
trait value differs from the other by a particular amount,
which we refer to as the optimal offset. By assuming that

Figure 1: Fitness curves under trait differences (left) and offset matching (right) as functions of the difference in individual traits x 2 y.
Solid lines represent the ﬁtness of individuals in species X. Dashed lines represent the ﬁtness of individuals in species Y. Vertical dotted
lines mark the location of offset ﬁtness optima. In the offset-matching case we have set d p 0:5. In both plots we have set BX 1 BY so that
species X experiences stronger selection than species Y. In particular, for trait differences we set BX p 1:5 and BY p 1, and for offset
matching we set BX p 15 and BY p 5.

198

The American Naturalist

ﬁtness is maximized at a positive optimal offset for both
species, we obtain a phenotypic mechanism for escalatory
selection. In particular, this assumes that each species beneﬁts from having a slightly larger trait but suffers reduced
ﬁtness beyond a certain threshold. This model of ﬁtness
was introduced by Week and Nuismer (2019) to simultaneously explain trait exaggeration and correlations of mean
traits across multiple populations, enabling the use of a simple maximum likelihood approach to measure the strength
of coevolution in the wild. By setting the optimal offset to
zero, the trait-matching model commonly used to model
mutualistic coevolution is recovered. Figure 1 compares
ﬁtness curves under trait differences and offset matching.
Following the notation introduced above, we denote by x
the trait value of an individual in species X and by y a trait
value in species Y. Assuming each individual participates
in a single interaction, individual ﬁtness under the offsetmatching model can be described by


BX
2
ð2aÞ
W X (x, y) ∝ exp 2 (x 1 d 2 y) ,
2


BY
W Y (y, x) ∝ exp 2 (y 1 d 2 x)2 ,
ð2bÞ
2
where d is the optimal offset and BX, BY 1 0 again determine the strength of biotic selection on the respective species. Although it is likely that each species will experience a
unique offset (say, dX and dY), such asymmetry can be accounted for in our model by the change of variables x0 p
x 1 dX =2, y0 p y 1 dY =2, and d p (dX 1 dY )=2. We therefore proceed with our assumption of identical optimal
offsets without loss of generality. A formal connection with
the trait-differences model can be established using a simultaneous weak selection and large optimal offset approximation. In particular, substituting BX, BY p ε3 and
d p 1=ε, the trait-differences mechanism can be obtained
using a second-order Taylor expansion around ε ≈ 0. We
illustrate this calculation in the supplemental PDF (available online).
Modeling Approach
The novelty of our approach lies in rigorous derivations
of growth rates alongside trait dynamics. Beginning with
the above-described models of individual ﬁtness, we follow
Week et al. (2021) and formally derive the continuous-time
growth rates for interacting populations from individualbased models (detailed calculations are provided in sec. A
of the supplemental PDF). The approach is essentially a
generalization of the classical diffusion-limit approach introduced by Feller (1951; but see Otto and Day 2011). To
illustrate the basic idea, consider a single population. First
assume that the population is composed of n discrete indi-

viduals and rescale their individual contribution to population size by the amount N 0 =n. Then, summing across
all individuals, the initial population size is N0 for any
n 1 0. Fitness is rescaled by W → W 1=n so that as individuals become more numerous and contribute less to overall
population size, their expected lifetime reproductive output
converges toward unity. Simultaneously, the rate at which
individuals reproduce and senesce is multiplied by n. This
latter step can be thought of as considering larger temporal
scales over which the dynamics are occurring. Finally, the
effects of mutation on offspring trait values are rescaled by
the amount 1=n so that mutation becomes less noticeable
at the individual scale with larger n. With this rescaling in
place, each n corresponds to a rescaled version of the original individual-based model. While population size and
mean trait value evolve in discrete jumps at birth and death
events for the individual-based model, in the limit n → ∞
the rescaled models converge to a limiting model with continuous evolution of mean trait and population size. This
diffusion limit provides a more mathematically tractable
model while preserving crucial features of the underlying
biology. This approach is typically taken to study stochastic dynamics resulting from small population size. However, we make use of this method here to formally derive
population-level models from interactions between individuals. To avoid eco-evolutionary feedbacks, we assume
that each individual interacts with exactly one individual
from the partner species. This assumption removes the
dependency of selection on abundance of the partner species. To dismiss stochastic dynamics, we send the rescaled
initial population sizes N 0 → ∞ after we have obtained
the diffusion limit from the rescaled individual-based
model. Applying this approach to the models of ﬁtness reviewed above results in a set of ordinary (deterministic)
differential equations tracking the mean traits of coevolving species.
To describe our models mathematically, we denote by
mX (x, y) the growth rate of individuals in species X with
trait value x that interact with individuals of species Y
having trait value y. Similarly, we denote by mY (y, x) the
growth rate of individuals in species Y having trait value y
interacting with individuals of species X with trait value x.
Averaging mX (x, y) and mY (y, x) across interacting pairs,
 X and m
Y
we obtain the continuous-time growth rates m
for species X and Y, respectively. We assume that trait values x and y are normally distributed with means x and y,
respectively, and variances j2X and j2Y , respectively. We denote by GX and GY the additive genetic variances (assumed
to be constant), by rX and rY the intrinsic growth rates, and
by eX and eY the baseline effects of interactions on growth
rates (i.e., the effects on growth rates due to the interaction
that do not vary with trait values) for species X and Y, respectively. This notation is summarized in table 1.

Mutualistic Arms Races

199

Table 1: Summary of notation
Parameter
x, y
x, y
j2X , j2Y ≥ 0
GX , G Y ≥ 0
mX (x, y), mY (y, x)
Y

mX , m
r X , rY
I X , IY
e X , eY
B X , BY ≥ 0
d≥0

Description
Individual trait values
Population mean trait values
Population trait variances
Additive genetic variances: the heritable components of j2X and j2Y
Growth rates as functions of focal individual trait and trait of interacting partner
Population growth rates: averages of mX and mY across interacting partners
Intrinsic growth rates: population growth rates in the absence of interaction
Overall interaction effects: effects of the interaction on population growth rates
Baseline interaction effects: effects of the interaction in the absence of biotic selection
Strengths of biotic selection: coevolution requires BX, BY 1 0
Optimal offset: determines ﬁtness maxima in the offset-matching model

Note: Except for those indicated, all model parameters can be positive or negative.

Using D to denote results under trait differences and
O for offset matching, we ﬁnd the following pairs of population growth rates:


m X p r X 1 eX 1 BX (x 2 y),
ð3aÞ
D
 Y p r Y 1 eY 1 BY (y 2 x );
m
8
BX
BX
>
 X p r X 1 eX 2 (y 1 d 2 x )2 2 (j2X 1 j2Y ),
<m
2
2
O
B
B
>
Y
Y
:m
 Y p r Y 1 eY 2 (x 1 d 2 y )2 2 (j2X 1 j2Y ):
2
2
ð3bÞ

we ﬁnd growth rates for each species can be additively
 X p I X 1 r X and 
partitioned as m
mY p I Y 1 rY , where IX
and IY represent the components due to the interspeciﬁc
interaction and the intrinsic growth rates rX and rY represent the components due to everything else. Following
equations (3), trait differences and offset matching respectively yield
(
I X p eX 1 BX (x 2 y ),
ð6aÞ
D
I Y p eY 1 BY (x 2 y );

In section C of the supplemental PDF, we show that
the trait-speciﬁc growth rates mX (x, y)and mY (y, x) do not
exhibit frequency-dependent selection. Hence, following
our approach to derive deterministic dynamics, we calculate the evolution of mean traits via

ð6bÞ

X
dx
∂m
p GX
∂x ,
dt

ð4aÞ

Y
dy
∂m
p GY
∂y :
dt

ð4bÞ

This yields the following two sets of mean trait
dynamics:
8
dx
>
>
p GX BX ,
<
dt
ð5aÞ
D
>
>
: dy p GY BY ;
dt
8
dx
>
>
p GX BX (y 1 d 2 x ),
<
dt
ð5bÞ
O
>
>
: dy p GY BY (x 1 d 2 y):
dt
Under our assumption of ﬁxed phenotypic variances,
the population growth rates presented in equations (3)
change only through mean trait evolution. In particular,

8
BX
>
< I X p eX 2 [(y 1 d 2 x )2 1 j2X 1 j2Y ],
2
O
B
>
: I p e 2 Y [(x 1 d 2 y )2 1 j2 1 j2 ]:
Y
Y
X
Y
2

Hence, IX and IY determine the type of interaction between species X and Y. Speciﬁcally, if IX, I Y 1 0, the interaction is a mutualism, and if either I X ! 0 or I Y ! 0, the
interaction is an antagonism. Thus, by tracking the signs
of IX and IY as mean traits evolve, we can track the evolutionary switching of ecological interaction types. In particular, if an interaction mechanism promotes the evolutionary switching from a mutualism to a parasitism, then
IX and IY begin with positive values and eventually one of
either IX or IY becomes negative because of the evolution
of x and y. In the following section, we combine the coevolutionary models presented above with this criterion
to determine when an interaction mechanism promotes
evolutionary switching from mutualism to parasitism.
Results
Trait Differences Promotes Switching to Parasitism
We begin by exploring the conditions under which sustained trait exaggeration can occur under the model of
trait differences without the interaction dissolving into antagonism. Speciﬁcally, because the trait-differences model

200

The American Naturalist

yields sustained trait exaggeration under positive selection
strengths (i.e., BX, BY 1 0), we study how the ecological nature of the interaction evolves under this regime. Combining
equations (5a) and (6a), we ﬁnd that the overall effects of the
interaction on species growth rates evolve via
dI X
p BX (GX BX 2 GY BY ),
dt

ð7aÞ

dI Y
p BY (GY BY 2 GX BX ):
dt

ð7bÞ

Hence, unless the products of additive genetic variance
and strength of biotic selection is perfectly balanced between the two species so that GX BX p GY BY , the effects
on species growth rates will indeﬁnitely evolve in opposite
directions. This symmetry condition is unlikely to hold in
nature, implying that one of the species will evolve to become a parasite of the other. Thus, no matter how large
the baseline effects eX and eY are, mutualisms mediated
by a trait-differences mechanism tend toward parasitism.
The left panel of ﬁgure 2 displays this steady disintegration of mutualism by tracking the evolution of overall in-

teraction effects IX and IY. For the particular parameters
chosen, species Y becomes the host, and species X becomes the parasite. The right panel of ﬁgure 2 displays
the rate of transition from mutualism to parasitism as a
function of GX BX 2 GY BY . When GX BX ! GY BY , species Y
becomes the parasite, and when GX BX 1 GY BY , species X
becomes the parasite.
There are three important caveats to this result: (1) the
lack of stabilizing selection, (2) the assumed independence
of ecological and evolutionary dynamics, and (3) the assumption of weak selection. Each may have important consequences for our predictions, which we work through in
detail in the discussion section.

Offset Matching Stabilizes Mutualistic Interactions
Here, we assume that ﬁtness for an individual is maximized when its trait value exceeds that of its partners’
by some speciﬁc amount d 1 0, which we refer to as the
optimal offset (see ﬁg. 1). Under these assumptions, equation (5b) yields ever-increasing trait values. Combining
equations (5b) and (6b), we ﬁnd that the effects on species
growth rates evolve via

Figure 2: Left, time-series plot illustrating the trajectories of overall interaction effects IX and IY. The solid line represents the overall interaction effect on species X, and the dashed line represents the overall interaction effect on species Y. The horizontal dotted line marks
the threshold determining the interaction type. When IX or IY is below this line, the interaction is an antagonism. Hence, for the particular
parameters chosen, this graph shows that species X evolves to become a parasite of species Y. Right, rate of transition from parasitism to
mutualism as a function of GX BX 2 GY BY under the assumption BX ! BY . On the right side of the plane, species X becomes a parasite of
species Y. On the left side of the plane, this relationship is reversed. For both plots we set BX p 5e 2 3 and BY p 1:5e 2 2. For the left plot,
we used initial values I X p 1 and I Y p 3 and set GX p 10 and GY p 1.

Mutualistic Arms Races
dI X
dD
p 2BX (d 2 D)
,
dt
dt

ð8aÞ

dI Y
dD
ð8bÞ
p 2BY (d 1 D)
,
dt
dt
where D p x 2 y. In turn, the difference in mean traits D
evolves via


dD
GX BX 2 GY BY
p (GX BX 1 GY BY )
d 2 D : ð9Þ
GX BX 1 GY BY
dt
Since the offset-matching model requires positive selection strengths BX , BY 1 0, equation (9) implies that the
difference in mean trait values D will always evolve to a stable equilibrium, even though the mean traits x and y evolve
indeﬁnitely greater values. In particular, we ﬁnd that the
difference in mean trait values at equilibrium can be expressed as
^ p GX BX 2 GY BY d:
D
GX BX 1 GY BY

ð10Þ

In spite of ever-escalating mean trait values x and y,
when D is at its equilibrium, the components of species
growth rates IX and IY have also reached a stable equilibrium, given by

BX
I^X p eX 2
2
BY
I^Y p eY 2
2



2GY BY d
GX BX 1 GY BY



2GX BX d
GX BX 1 GY BY

2
2

201


1 (j2X 1 j2Y ) ,

ð11aÞ


1 (j2X 1 j2Y ) :

ð11bÞ

Hence, trait escalation under the offset-matching model
promotes the stabilization of interaction effects in the absence of all other evolutionary forces. This means that if
the baseline effects eX and eY are large enough, the interaction will remain a mutualism even as trait values escalate
indeﬁnitely toward larger values. Furthermore, this result
implies novel interactions that begin as a parasitism may
evolve toward mutualism when mediated by an offsetmatching mechanism. Figure 3 illustrates these results by
tracking the evolution of overall interaction effects IX and
IY for two scenarios.
Inspection of equations (11) reveals that the minimal
baseline beneﬁts eX and eY needed to preserve mutualism
increase logistically with the selection strength of the partner species. For example, the minimal value of eX required
to maintain beneﬁts for species X does not increase indefinitely with BY. In contrast, we see that these minimal quantities do increase indeﬁnitely with the selection strengths
of their focal species, the optimal offset d, and phenotypic

Figure 3: Time-series plots of overall interaction effects IX and IY under two scenarios. Solid lines represent the overall interaction effect on
species X, and dashed lines represent the overall interaction effect on species Y. The horizontal dotted lines mark the threshold determining
the interaction type. When IX or IY is below this line, the interaction is an antagonism. The left plot illustrates a mutualism that is preserved
in spite of indeﬁnitely escalating trait values. The right plot illustrates a novel parasitism that experiences an evolutionary switch to mutualism. Parameter values for the left plot are D0 p 0, d p 100, BX p 1e 2 5, BY p 5e 2 5, eX p 2, eY p 3, and GX p GY p j2X p j2Y p 10.
Parameter values for the right plot are D0 p 500, d p 0:5, BX p 1e 2 5, BY p 1:5e 2 5, eX p 2, eY p 1, and GX p GY p j2X p j2Y p 10.

202

The American Naturalist

variances j2X and j2Y . To summarize, mutualisms mediated
by an offset-matching mechanism are more likely to dissolve into parasitisms when ﬁtness is maximized for large
offsets, when either species maintains a sufﬁciently large
trait variance, or when either species experiences strong
selection.
Discussion
We have shown that mutualistic interactions can be preserved in the face of indeﬁnite coevolutionary trait escalation. However, this result depends on the mechanism mediating interspeciﬁc interactions. In particular, we found
that interactions mediated by a weak selection approximation of the trait-differences mechanism, which has
been traditionally employed to model trait escalation in
coevolving antagonisms (Toju and Sota 2006; Nuismer
et al. 2007), encourages the dissolution of mutualism into
parasitism. In contrast, employing the recently introduced
offset-matching mechanism (Week and Nuismer 2019),
which generalizes the classical trait-matching mechanism
proposed by Kiester et al. (1984), we found that mutualistic
interactions are preserved when the baseline beneﬁts of the
interaction are sufﬁciently large (eqq. [11]).
Our analyses are particularly relevant for the study of
pairwise plant-pollinator interactions. Indeed, the primary
motivation for this work is the hypothesis that exaggerated
ﬂoral tubes and pollinator proboscises observed in the wild
are explained by pairwise coevolutionary races. Plantpollinator interactions provide classical examples of mutualisms in which the plant provides a nutritional or metabolic resource to the pollinator in trade for movement of
pollen. Under the trait-differences mechanism, our results
imply that the difference between average proboscis length
and average ﬂoral tube depth will increase indeﬁnitely,
leading to one of two outcomes: (1) ﬂoral tube depth will
eventually exceed pollinator proboscis length, such that
the pollinator is essentially tricked into transferring pollen
without access to any reward, or (2) pollinator proboscis
length will eventually exceed ﬂoral tube depth, such that
the pollinator drains the ﬂower of nectar without transferring pollen. In both of these cases, one species is eventually
exploited while the other continues to proﬁt from the interaction. Quantitatively, this implies that the overall interaction effect on absolute ﬁtness becomes negative for
one of the species and hence results in a host-parasite
relationship.
Alternatively, results based on the offset-matching mechanism, which assumes that ﬁtness is maximized at a particular offset instead of indeﬁnitely increasing or decreasing
with the difference in mean trait values, imply that this
parasitic fate is not universal among mutualistic pairs engaged in a coevolutionary arms race. Returning to the plant-

pollinator example given above, the offset-matching mechanism implies that the difference in average proboscis
length and average ﬂoral tube depth will converge to a stable equilibrium proportional to the optimal offset, even
though these mean traits will themselves continue to escalate indeﬁnitely. In this case, there are three conditions required to maintain the mutualism: (1) the optimal offset
must be sufﬁciently small, (2) biotic selection cannot be
too strong (as determined by eX and eY; see eqq. [11]),
and (3) local phenotypic variances cannot be too large. If
all three of these conditions are satisﬁed, then the phenotypic distribution of each species remains in a range that
beneﬁts the other species, even though these ranges are
dynamic.
One hypothesized mechanism for the evolutionary
breakdown of mutualism is the evolution of cheating individuals that exploit the beneﬁts of the interaction without reciprocation (Bronstein 2001; Ferrière et al. 2007).
To understand whether this mechanism explains the evolutionary switch from mutualism to parasitism predicted
by the trait-differences model, we can apply the deﬁnition
of cheating provided by Jones et al. (2015). According to
this deﬁnition, cheaters must satisfy two conditions. First,
a cheater must enjoy greater ﬁtness than the mean ﬁtness
of their focal population. Second, a cheater must decrease
the ﬁtness of their partner below the average ﬁtness of the
partner population. Since we assume that individuals encounter each other at random, individuals are expected to
cheat under the trait-differences model whenever their
trait value exceeds the average trait value of their focal
population. Furthermore, since we assume that traits are
symmetrically distributed, half of the individuals in each
species are expected to cheat at any stage of the coevolutionary arms race. In particular, this implies that the mechanism of mutualistic breakdown studied here is not explained
by the evolution of cheaters when using the deﬁnition provided by Jones et al. (2015). However, if we deﬁne cheating
using absolute ﬁtness instead of relative ﬁtness, the frequency of cheating in the eventual parasitic species would
evolve toward unity. Hence, under an alternative deﬁnition of cheating, this result is equivalent to an explanation
of mutualistic breakdown by cheating. Thus, whether the
mechanism of mutualistic breakdown studied here is distinct from the evolution of cheating depends on the deﬁnition of cheating employed.
Although our mathematical analyses shed light on the
outcomes of pairwise interactions, plant-pollinator interactions based on a trade between pollen movement and
food tend to be generalized (Waser et al. 1996; Vázquez
and Aizen 2004). These interactions may therefore vary
as a result of their ecological context. To understand the
dynamics of evolutionary interaction switching in the
presence of multispeciﬁc interactions, the analytical methods

Mutualistic Arms Races
developed here can be extended to models of coevolving
mutualistic networks (e.g., Medeiros et al. 2018). In the
case that a subset of the community engages in a multispeciﬁc coevolutionary arms race, the species left behind
are at risk of becoming parasitized. For example, in the
ﬂy-ﬂower pollination system investigated by Pauw et al.
(2009), the long-proboscid ﬂy Moegistorhynchus longirostris
is known to visit at least 20 long-tubed ﬂower species
(Manning and Goldblatt 1997). This plant guild includes
Lapeirousia anceps, which is the most abundant and widespread member (Pauw et al. 2009). The exaggerated nectar
tube of L. anceps exhibits strong spatial correlations with
the proboscis length of M. longirostris. By interfacing these
patterns of trait exaggeration and spatial correlation with
coevolutionary theory, Week and Nuismer (2019) were
able to provide quantitative evidence for a coevolutionary
arms race between the two species. However, in the course
of this arms race it is likely that M. longirostris imposed
and received selection pressures from other members of
the long-tubed plant guild, leading to a compartment of
species engaged in a coevolutionary arms race (Pauw et al.
2009). As a consequence, mutualistic interactions between
M. longirostris and ﬂower species outside this compartment
are at risk of disintegrating into parasitisms.
A likely antagonism that may have been produced indirectly as a by-product of coevolutionary escalation as
described above occurs between M. longirostris and the
iris Babiana thunbergii. Moegistorhynchus longirostris has
been observed to frequently visit ﬂowers of B. thunbergii,
which are usually pollinated by malachite sunbirds and
have a much shorter and wider ﬂoral morphology. Pauw
et al. (2009) noted that M. longirostris rarely contacts the
reproductive organs of B. thunbergii while draining its
nectar and hence acts as a parasitic nectar thief. In the case
that B. thunbergii originally proﬁted from visits of M. longirostris, before the evolution of extreme proboscis lengths,
external sources of selection, such as those due to sunbirds,
may have countered selection for ﬂoral elongation. In this
case, the disintegration of mutualism follows a different
path from what we have described above for pairwise interactions. Instead of direct pairwise interactions leading
to an intimate race for exaggerated trait values, indirect coevolutionary effects due to interactions with other community members impose inconsistent patterns of selection
for each member of the focal pair. A recent theoretical result supports this view by suggesting that such indirect effects are as important for shaping coevolutionary dynamics in ecological networks as direct effects (Guimarães et al.
2017).
For the sake of analytical tractability and clarity of results, we have kept our analysis as simple as possible while
recognizing that our assumptions are unlikely to be satisﬁed literally in real biological systems. For instance, ig-

203

noring stabilizing selection implies the absence of wellestablished physiological and anatomical constraints that
prevent indeﬁnite runaway coevolution. Similarly, we have
ignored the possible depletion of heritable variation and
the inﬂuence of abundance dynamics, and in the case of
trait differences we considered only weak coevolution. Although these assumptions come at the cost of biological
realism, they have allowed us to understand and illuminate the tendency of trait differences and offset matching
to motivate or resist evolutionary transitions from mutualism to parasitism. Hence, our results should be interpreted
in much the same way as results obtained from experiments conducted in controlled but biologically unrealistic
environments. It would therefore be premature, for example,
to combine our results with the argument made by Frederickson (2017)—namely, that parasitisms are more likely to experience a switch to mutualism than vice versa—to conclude
that mutualistic arms races observed in the wild tend to be
mediated by offset mechanisms. Indeed, mutualism in the
face of an arms race may instead be explained by combining
the trait-differences mechanism with abiotic stabilizing selection. Thus, to predict and understand when wild populations of coevolving mutualists are doomed to an inevitable
parasitic fate, we must confront these complications directly
and with more complex and biologically realistic models.
Of the large set of processes we have controlled for, perhaps the most important are eco-evolutionary feedbacks.
Future models using our framework can incorporate the
effects of eco-evolutionary feedbacks by replacing the assumption that each individual interacts with a single individual of their partner species with the assumption that
individual interaction frequencies depend on abundances.
As an example, assuming that each individual of species X
interacts once with each individual of species Y (and vice
versa) yields baseline beneﬁts eX and eY and strengths of biotic selection BX and BY that depend linearly on the abundance of the partner species. Hence, this assumption leads
to generalizations of classical mass action models of population dynamics, such as the Lotka-Volterra predatorprey model (Lotka 1925; Volterra 1926), that allow for
the evolutionary switching of interaction type in tandem
with the ﬂuctuations of abundance. In this case, the overall
interaction effects can be expressed as I X p aX N Y and
I Y p aY N X , where aX and aY represent the interaction
coefﬁcients corresponding to species X and Y, respectively.
In principle, the same approach developed here to analyze
evolutionary interaction switching can be directly extended
to this more complicated scenario.
Conclusion
We have introduced a novel approach to model the evolutionary switching of interaction types by tracking the

204

The American Naturalist

evolution of absolute ﬁtness in addition to trait dynamics.
Applying our approach to two models of coevolutionary
trait escalation inspired by plant-pollinator interactions
revealed that mutualisms mediated by a bigger-is-better
(i.e., trait-differences) mechanism inevitably dissolve into
parasitism. In contrast, our results show that mutualisms
mediated by an offset-matching mechanism, a generalization of classical trait matching, are preserved when the
baseline beneﬁts of the interaction (i.e., the components
that do not vary with trait values) are large enough. Our
results are based on minimal models of mean trait coevolution determined by different interaction mechanisms
and hence ignore the effects of external evolutionary processes and eco-evolutionary feedbacks. Predicting when
wild populations of mutualists are prone to disintegration
via coevolutionary arms races will likely require more complex models that account for a variety of processes, such
as abiotic stabilizing selection, gene ﬂow, random genetic
drift, and multispeciﬁc interactions. Future work applying
the analytical approach developed here to models that account for realistic sets of evolutionary processes can enrich
our understanding of the dynamical nature of ecological
relationships observed in the wild and produce novel statistical tools to forecast the evolutionary stability of ecological relationships.
Acknowledgments
We thank Editor Jennifer A. Lau, Associate Editor Adam
M. Siepielski, and two anonymous reviewers for their insightful and encouraging comments.
Statement of Authorship
B.W. conceived the project, formulated the model, performed the analysis, produced the ﬁgures, and wrote the
original draft and revision. S.L.N. provided supervision,
reviewed and edited the manuscript, and secured funding.
Data and Code Availability
There is no code or data for this article.
Literature Cited
Anderson, B., and S. D. Johnson. 2007. The geographical mosaic of
coevolution in a plant-pollinator mutualism. Evolution 62:220–
225.
———. 2009. Geographical covariation and local convergence of
ﬂower depth in a guild of ﬂy-pollinated plants. New Phytologist
182:533–540.
Anderson, B., J. S. Terblanche, and A. G. Ellis. 2010. Predictable patterns of trait mismatches between interacting plants and insects.
BMC Evolutionary Biology 10:204.

Benkman, C. W., T. L. Parchman, A. Favis, and A. M. Siepielski. 2003.
Reciprocal selection causes a coevolutionary arms race between
crossbills and lodgepole pine. American Naturalist 162:182–194.
Brodie, E. D., III, C. R. Feldman, C. T. Haniﬁn, J. E. Motychak, D. G.
Mulcahy, B. L. Williams, and E. D. Brodie Jr. 2005. Parallel arms
races between garter snakes and newts involving tetrodotoxin as
the phenotypic interface of coevolution. Journal of Chemical
Ecology 31:343–356.
Bronstein, J. L. 1994. Conditional outcomes in mutualistic interactions. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 9:214–217.
———. 2001. The exploitation of mutualisms. Ecology Letters 4:277–
287.
Darwin, C. 1862. On the various contrivances by which British and
foreign orchids are fertilised by insects: and on the good effects of
intercrossing. J. Murray, London.
de Andreazzi, C. S., J. Astegiano, and P. R. Guimarães. 2019. Coevolution by different functional mechanisms modulates the structure and dynamics of antagonistic and mutualistic networks.
Oikos 129:224–237.
Feller, W. 1951. Diffusion processes in genetics. Pages 227–246
in Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability. University of California Press,
Berkeley.
Ferrière, R., M. Gauduchon, and J. L. Bronstein. 2007. Evolution
and persistence of obligate mutualists and exploiters: competition for partners and evolutionary immunization. Ecology Letters 10:115–126.
Frederickson, M. E. 2017. Mutualisms are not on the verge of breakdown. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 32:727–734.
Gavrilets, S. 1997. Coevolutionary chase in exploiter-victim systems
with polygenic characters. Journal of Theoretical Biology 186:527–
534.
Gavrilets, S., and A. Hastings. 1998. Coevolutionary chase in twospecies systems with applications to mimicry. Journal of Theoretical Biology 191:415–427.
Gomulkiewicz, R., S. L. Nuismer, and J. N. Thompson. 2003. Coevolution in variable mutualisms. American Naturalist 162:S80–
S93.
Guimarães, P. R., M. M. Pires, P. Jordano, J. Bascompte, and J. N.
Thompson. 2017. Indirect effects drive coevolution in mutualistic networks. Nature 550:511–514.
Inouye, D. W. 1980. The terminology of ﬂoral larceny. Ecology
61:1251–1253.
Jones, E. I., M. E. Afkhami, E. Akçay, J. L. Bronstein, R. Bshary, M. E.
Frederickson, K. D. Heath, et al. 2015. Cheaters must prosper:
reconciling theoretical and empirical perspectives on cheating
in mutualism. Ecology Letters 18:1270–1284.
Kiester, A. R., R. Lande, and D. W. Schemske. 1984. Models of coevolution and speciation in plants and their pollinators. American Naturalist 124:220–243.
Lotka, A. 1925. Elements of physical biology. Williams & Wilkins,
Baltimore.
Manning, J. C., and P. Goldblatt. 1997. The Moegistorhynchus longirostris (Diptera: Nemestrinidae) pollination guild: long-tubed
ﬂowers and a specialized long-proboscid ﬂy pollination system in
southern Africa. Plant Systematics and Evolution 206:51–69.
Medeiros, L. P., G. Garcia, J. N. Thompson, and P. R. Guimarães.
2018. The geographic mosaic of coevolution in mutualistic networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA 115:12017–12022.

Mutualistic Arms Races
Muchhala, N., and J. D. Thomson. 2010. Fur versus feathers: pollen
delivery by bats and hummingbirds and consequences for pollen
production. American Naturalist 175:717–726.
Nuismer, S. L. 2017. Introduction to coevolutionary theory. W. H.
Freeman, San Francisco.
Nuismer, S. L., R. Gomulkiewicz, and M. T. Morgan. 2003. Coevolution in temporally variable environments. American Naturalist 162:195–204.
Nuismer, S. L., B. J. Ridenhour, and B. P. Oswald. 2007. Antagonistic coevolution mediated by phenotypic differences between
quantitative traits. Evolution 61:1823–1834.
Nuismer, S. L., J. N. Thompson, and R. Gomulkiewicz. 1999. Gene
ﬂow and geographically structured coevolution. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B 266:605–609.
Nuismer, S. L., and B. Week. 2019. Approximate Bayesian estimation of coevolutionary arms races. PLoS Computational Biology
15:e1006988.
Otto, S. P., and T. Day. 2011. A biologist’s guide to mathematical
modeling in ecology and evolution. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
Pauw, A., J. Stofberg, and R. J. Waterman. 2009. Flies and ﬂowers
in Darwin’s race. Evolution 63:268–279.
Thompson, J. N. 2014. Interaction and coevolution. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

205

Thompson, J. N., and O. Pellmyr. 1992. Mutualism with pollinating
seed parasites amid co-pollinators: constraints on specialization.
Ecology 73:1780–1791.
Toju, H., and T. Sota. 2006. Adaptive divergence of scaling relationships mediates the arms race between a weevil and its host
plant. Biology Letters 2:539–542.
Vázquez, D. P., and M. A. Aizen. 2004. Asymmetric specialization: a
pervasive feature of plant-pollinator interactions. Ecology 85:1251–
1257.
Volterra, V. 1926. Fluctuations in the abundance of a species considered mathematically. Nature 118:558–560.
Wallace, A. R. 1867. Creation by law. Quarterly Journal of Science
4:470–488.
Waser, N. M., L. Chittka, M. V. Price, N. M. Williams, and J. Ollerton.
1996. Generalization in pollination systems, and why it matters.
Ecology 77:1043–1060.
Week, B., and S. L. Nuismer. 2019. The measurement of coevolution in the wild. Ecology Letters 22:717–725.
Week, B., S. L. Nuismer, L. J. Harmon, and S. M. Krone. 2021. A white
noise approach to evolutionary ecology. Journal of Theoretical Biology 521:110660.
Associate Editor: Adam M. Siepielski
Editor: Jennifer A. Lau

“The habits of the species are those of the Centrarchidæ generally, modiﬁed in so far as being merely more of a mud-loving species. So
purely a mud-dwelling ﬁsh are they that we have frequently found them in water so shallow, that they marked the mud with their pectoral
ﬁns in swimming; preferring such shallow water, with the mud, to that which was deeper, to which they had access, because it was over a
stony bed.” Figured: “Spotted Sun-ﬁsh (Enneacanthus guttatus).” From “Mud-Loving Fishes” by Charles C. Abbott (The American Naturalist, 1870, 4:385–391).

